72 Reproductive Technology

The evolution of the new techniques of in—vitro fertilization an,

embryo transfer illustrate this process. On the face of it, the curren

enthusiasm for the new techniques seems curious. After all, in—vi
fertilization and embryo transfer have proceeded without much-f
ther work on establishing causes of infertility or improving ot

treatments. Given their low success rate, and the level of physical

danger and psychological distress that accompany these new reprr
ductrve technologies, why the current concentration on in-vitr
fertilization among infertility specialists? How does it happen the
resources are allocated to this ‘unsuccessful’ technology?

as a technically complex practice which onl the can

substantial. financial reward are to be had, is wellll as jblljesafifftggrig
By 1982 in Britain, the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaeco:

logists was already claiming that their fields had expanded so much

that it should be divided into four sub-specialities. ‘The pressures

towards sub—specialization within gynaecology and obstetrics then
constitute another incentive for medical personnel involved ’in the;
treatment of infertility to lay claim to new areas of expertise’.(Pfeffer
1987, p. 88). Official recognition of sub-specialization would attracf
financial support for training and research. In many ways therefore
it is'apparent that professional interests play a central role in deter-
mining the type and tempo of technological innovation in this area
There are however wider economic forces at work. The commercial

 
  
   
  
   
   
  
    
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
   
   

Reproductive Technology 73

‘ ests, of the vast biotechnology industry are particularly influen-
yuch has been written about the ‘new medical~industrial com-
d the way in which resources are systematically channelled into
table areas that often have no connection with satisfying human
, There is as yet little detailed information about the financial
ts of medical biotechnology corporations in the development
new reproductive technologies. Furthermore the potential com»
« applications of the products are as yet unclear, at least to the
ralpublic.“ What is clear is that the needs of infertile women
' nly a small part in the research agenda envisaged. Embryos are
_'que source of information about human genetics, embryonic
lopment and foetal growth. As Professor Robert Winston, of the
, ersmith Hospital, West London, explained: ‘We think that
o fertilization is merely the first step. In the long term the
g, 0 could be removed for paxﬁfew hours and then be replaced. This
, stion is not pie in the skyizilquoted in The Guardian, 1 January

'March 1989, male embryos had been distinguished from female
eyes within days of conception. The potential for genetic screen-
is now immense and with it the possibility for gene transplant
Iriments, known as ‘gene therapy’. The ultimate aim, which has
acted vast research funding in North America, Europe and Japan
' nravel all the instructions contained in the human genetic code.
omecommentators have likened the scope of the biotechnology
lotion to that of the microelectronic revolution, seeing it as the
echnology-based phase of capitalist development.12 Already we
see that the human body is caught up in commerce in new ways,
ithhuman organs such as kidneys, eyeballs, frozen foetuses and
tes being traded on the international market. Whatever one’s
‘tion on the ethics of embryo research it is clear that it is always
ctured by relations of exploitation based on race, class and gender.
je, rafﬂe in Korean foetuses for American military research into
,0 ogical warfare is a case in point.
’ ; though women are the prime targets of medical experimentation,
productive technology cannot be analysed in terms of a patriarchal
itnspiracy. Instead a complex web of interests has been woven here ~—
ose of professional and capitalist interests overlaid with gender. ”It
ore specifically to the operation of gender divisions that wenow
turn. The next section will examine the dynamics of a technology less
ecent and better documented than those referred to above. Nowhere
e: sexual relations more profoundly formative of a set of techno—

logies than in the sphere of contraception.

