   
 
 
  
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
  
 
   
   
 
  
    
  
  
   

90 Domestic Technology
Domestic Technology 91

paid work. This sexual divisi '

I OR o e a v H

artefacts themselves. of domestic activities :5 tea

angitftlratflngfi tlelivisior; viewing reﬂects existingstruetur
‘ , _' e 3 tons etween household ‘ L

I" . , , ,members-

3:11;: ‘31:: .1118’61assr nucleanfamtlies in London, David -’

to Q _ « womenand' men gave sconst ‘ * ' i‘
expenenceof televrsron Men res L L
. , . , . , .prefertowatchitel
in Silence, and without int ' emsro
_ . . erruptronvwomenits

watchtelcvrsron distractedl " ’ H eemsare

A _ , yeand gurltilyiebecau f7 '
senseaof their domestic res » . -. . . ” - 53951213

. _ ponsrbrhties Mali

determinant of. » - ~ e power was
. _ programme .chorceron'occa ' ’ '
over,'tn families who had at 810115 OfECD ﬂ}
remote control anel ‘ ‘ '
usedhy women I T " p ’ It was not
, . , yplcally, the control-d ' '
exclusively by the father( ‘ ' evlcewas 'rus,

, . orxbytheson,inzthe'fath ’ i
to soéneextent symbolizedhis domesticpower. gersabscn
fathiergoggorders, like remote control panels, are the posses

‘. , ,~ «sons. n“ order, to highlight th ‘ I V

, , ,_ _. , . _ c , engendere- ‘
household hjects,»Ann:Gray_z(1987)'iaskedwomentoima ifn“
flu! , ‘ loured-citheripirikéof‘blueri o

loci-Innovation and Housework Time

‘post—industrialutopians’ to conceive of the likely shape
sch id in ithe’futurc suffer from many of the intellectual
vegmisled analysts of domestic technology in the past.

he work of these theorists is speculative. The British
'd;,sociologist, Jonathan Gershuny (1978, 1983, 1985,
[aide the most sustained attempt to give empirical weight
ostrial predictions about the household.
startingpoint has little in common with that of the
His work is directed at theories of post—
being based increasingly
production. By contrast,
toward the

 

commentators.
, day which see the economy as
es other than on manufacturing
,irnain thesis. isthat the economy is moving
f. services within“the..~ousehold, that is, to being a self—

realism. _ »
ghsnmdrawing on the feminist literature, Gershuny shares
roduction is in fact work

cognition that unpaid domestic p
re turseriouslytas such. He goes on to ”argue for a reorientation
ayfzwe study technical change. Instead of starting from the
ice, as is typical for example in economics, sociology and
'c history, in his View we Should start: from the household .
eholdshave a certain rangeof needs,:a set of ‘service functions’
e» wishto satisfy, such as ‘food, shelter, domestic services,
ment,transport, medicine, education, and, more distantly,
_ entgservices, ‘law and order’ and defence’ (1983, p. 1). His-
"l‘ the-means bytwhichhouseholds satisfy these needs changes.
ny,:describesa shift“ from the purchase of final services (going
cinema,::travelling by train, sending washing to a commercial
)t-o the purchase of domestic technologies (buying a televi—
uying a car, buying a washing machine). A degree of unpaid
“ e’sticchrkeis necessary in order to use such commodities to
c. services. This model is used to explain the economic expan-
tofithezdeveloped economies in the 19505 andeéOs, which was
onv‘the creation of new mass markets in consumer durables,
Ionics and motor vehicles. In this way domestic technology is of
mucus economic significance, affecting the pattern of household
. nditure, the industrial distribution of employment and the divi-
nrof labour between paid and unpaid work.
kc Cowan,’Gershuny argues that people make rational decisions
n this area. However, whereas her emphasis is on moral values and

 
  
  
   
  
   
   

 
 

    
 
  
 
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  

   
   

 

control§:,:switehg of ad

   

e9 ‘ irecOrders were ideepnblue, that}

centﬁoﬂedébysmen.: , .. -
“Eggs; Is1 iisatlrzriitgfemetrittfrgom theavideorecorderz is no simplem
_' : («icu yo operatingit ‘Altho h'
operate extremelysophisticated . , ‘ ug, 2w omen ‘0
. ., . , ,, «pieces of domestic to h '
requiring, 111 the first’r‘instance‘th‘e L c “010”
L‘ ‘ mtudyanda l' ,, ‘
otmstructions the _ 2 i, .s . pp matron of am
,, , y. oftenfeclzahenated f ” ' L
G _ _ W ,_ -, : mm operatm he
( ray, 1987, p.43) Rather,.womeniscxperience withétheiiileo ha

beiunder stood in termsof,thegfgendering?' _:technology ‘When

    

