  
 
  
   
    
 
    
   
   
  
  
     
    

320 The Built Environment
The Built Environment 121

nctions, feminists have drawn attention to the sexual politics of
e inevitable outcome of a pro—

They have suggested that th ,
on and an industry inhabited and controlled by men is a male-

,Ined built space.
demestic architecture often cited as the epitome of a masculi-
approach isthe multiustorey residential block. This functionalist

ecture, whichenvisaged a vertical garden city with ‘streets in the

alias been discredited by feminists amongst others.7 The fact that

work and-childcare might be made more onerous and isolating
omen stranded i-‘at dizzy heights, without safe and accessible

did not occur to the pioneers of the Modern Move-

obr space. .
t «Apart from this obvious disregard for the quality of women’s

these towers “have also been seen as products of a specifically
vision (see‘éfigure 5.1). Modernism in architecture was obsessed
technological progress, adopting technology as both its instru-
and symbol; The development of the high—rise form was a monu-

“t to technological innovation and a strikingly phallic symbol.
nalyses is that women experience

e underlying g-theme :of such a
differently from men and would therefore create-different built

criments. Margrit Kennedy, a Berlin—based architect, argues that

“would be a“«“significant difference between an environment
pedﬁ mainly by men ., ,ndiémale, values, and an environment shaped
y: byI’WOmen and female values’ (1981, p. 76). Whereas men
n a buildingtfrom the outsidefiin, women’s greater preoccupation
interiors leadséi‘r’them to design buildings from the inside out.
edyzizsuggests: that there are the following male and female

Liples in architecture:

expands .- work traditionally done by women. Development
information and communication technologies greatly facilitatel
scale shifts rn the nature and location of employment and
decentralization of workplaces. It is not only office work that «i (
bemgv‘suburbanized’. Industrial zones on the urban periphery
become massrve centres of development. And suburban spraw

stimulated the. development of regional retail complexes. Meanwt
administrative and financial activities — head office functions
$32111; a110;:amtfetd m thefcentral city area. Overall this represents at l

awa ' ‘

use of urban spacey. rorn mono—functional zoning to a more "
There 18 currently much interest in the contemporary restructu

 

    
 
  
 
   
  
   
  
    
 
 
  
   
 
  
   
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
  

unequal. distribution of income among various groups in the ur
population. In Los Angeles, for example, it has beenpointed on
industrial restructuring has left the largely Chicano/Hispani and
blac . industrial workingclass cut off from the new workplaces

While such StudieS‘Feﬁognize the spatial construction of classra?

or oppressed ‘rninority’ groups.6 There is-little attempt to explore :
different implications of such developments for women and men; : i
the ways in which the contemporary restructuring of cities affects

social relations of reproduction as well as the relations of productio

The Male Principles

than designer oriented
than large scale/monumental
than formal
_ than fixed
more organically ordered than abstractly systematized,
more holistic/ complex than i specialized/oneydimension

ore social than profit—oriented 1 ‘
more slo’wly growing than _ quickly constructed

Feminist‘Alfornaﬂves' Would W ‘
_. , . one D
Differently? ﬂ 0 H

if titre built environment-tends to institutionalize patriarchal relation
is t gs because it has been designed and constructed predominantly, b1,
men. Would women, then, produce a different physical environmen
Planning and. architecture in Britain, North America and Australia
31:: indeed white, male:dominated professions. This is mirrored
rough all stages of building; even the production of the physicai
built structure is done by an almost all-male workforce. As thyT
‘inumst desrgners’ collective known as Matrix (1984, p. 3) comments '
momen- play almost no part in making decisions about or in creating
e envrronment. It is a man—made environment.’ In their critiques
of modern architecture, urban planning and of publicfprivate

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  

These ideas are echoed in many feminist critiqueso are,“
practice, which argue that whereas male subjectivity. isex ’
tall phallic towers, female buildings are round, enclosing _ \
low-rise. Such views are not the prerogative of feministsal

