     
   
  
  
   
   
    
 
 
  
  
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
  

70 Reproductive Technology
Reproductive Technology 71

ed '30 their claims to expertise might appear tenuous to women.
argues that technology is particularly attractive to obstetri»
ecause techniques such as the stethoscope and foetal monitor—
able male doctors to claim to know more about women’s bodies
éwomen themselves.
the technology is available women as patients may well want
ct high~technology treatment. This does not make women the
ictims of reproductive technologies and the male doctors who
1 em..Within limits, women who are already advantaged in the
ructure may even experience ‘a sense of greater control and
3 powerment than they would have if left to “traditional”
eds: or ffnature’” (Petehesky-, 1987, p. 72).
wever, the routine use of ultrasound imaging in pregnancy
ues despite scepticism as to its medical benefits. Indeed the basic
queof ultrasound was not designed for obstetric purposes at all.
origins date from atternptsigto detect submarines through sound-
" «during the First World War. The subsequent development of
asoimd-as a medical technology was as an offshoot of a major
chproject on acoustics at MIT financed by the US Navy (Yoxen,
The concentration on pregnancy came several years after its use
herrClinicaldiagnostic fields and the interest in foetal abnormality
ates of growth. with which it is now mainly associated, came even
The procedure serves to‘discredit and then displace women’s
xperience of the progress of the foetus in favour of scientific
n the monitor. Some feminist critics fear that these techniques
women into mere spectators of their own medically-managed
gnancy. As such they represent the ultimate appropriation by men
Iornen’s knowledge and expertise.
azithin Westernmedicine, the high technology activities are not
:key to power at the level of doctor—patient relations, but also
ower , within the profession. Status, money and professional
'laim :within the medical profession are distributed according to
technological sophistication of the speciality. To be seen to be
veloping and expanding hightechnology procedures signals success
he competition for scarce resources ~ as between specialists;
cent hospitals, and between individuals. ‘Medical specialization],
datechnological innovation have a special feature: they are paraiieiv
d interactive. Medical specialization leads to technological inno.
mathen, as-a given technology is used, physicians and indis-
signers collaborate to improve it. As it is defined, that proees ’
never more specialization and associated work and :procedl'

{Fagerhaugh et al., 1987, pp. 7-8).

practice'is not by any means confined to obstetrics and both '

and female patients find it an alienating experience: ‘ m'
f In e11(;odern Western medicinettechnological advances havet-r 7
orm. the methods of diagnosmg illness, and these new metho

The ubiquitous stethoscope has its origins inthe doctor’s wishtd‘ ‘
the patient at adistance, overlaid with: the requirementsof tired
as between men and women. According to the apocryphal stor ~
stethoscope was invented in 1816 by Laennec, during the examiniit‘y
of a young woman who had a bafflingheart disorder Restraine 1
the patient’s youth and sex from placing his ear to her heart he reca
thatesound travelled through solid bodies. From rolling some sh
of paper into a, cylinder onthis occasion he went on to constru tee
first wooden stethoscope "(Reisen 1978, p. 25). Theihuman eaic' L
supplanted by the stethoscope not because of any technical d f' ' V ,
but because of prevailing social mores.m yr 6 lclen:
Broadly speaking. since the nineteenth century there have b
three. stages methe historical development of , the methods usede
diagnoseillness; Physicians-have moved ‘from direct communicat' ‘
with their patients’ experiences, based upon a verbal techni u 10
information. gathering. to direct connection with» the patients’ goedi
throughtechmques of physical examination, to: indirect connecti

 
  
   
 
  

dent clinical jud
gements based u ,'
experience. pon their own abilities and. »
WOObstetrics is a special case because the patients are uniformly:
(legion, t ey are generally not ill, and it is clearly an area where male
ors can have no personal experience of the ‘condition’ being

 

