108 Domestic Technology

900

10

ll

12

,believedrthat technology was a powerful ally.

Domestic Technology “)9

     
    
   
    
       
   
    
   
   
    
   
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
   

his point is made by Megan Hicksl, ‘Migrgolwave Ovens’ (MSC disserta-

» ‘versit of New South Wa es, . _
”:1: 21:1 onlyyspeculate as to whether covering up the mechanircal
“workings of appliances assisted indelitenatmg women from understan mg

'nes and how to men t em.

hgfeaifiige unintended consequences of a technology are not always
Epositive. The diffusion of the telephone has facrhtated the electronidc
ntrusion of pornography into the home. Not only are abustve anl
arassing telephone calls made largely by men to women, but new sexua1
services are being made available. The French post offices Minrte
service, which is a small television screen lmkedto the telephone, has
em a massive ‘pink message service’ arise. When it was introduced over
en? years ago, the Minitel system was intended to replacethe tell'lephont:
‘rectory. Since then it has developed thousands of servxces, t 6‘ mo;
popular being pornographic conversations and sexual dating vtafft e
lectronic mail. Whencornplaints have been made the French post 0 .196
claim that they can do nothingéso censor hardcore pornography as 13 is
.art of private conversations. One wonders how this might affect gen er

elations in the home.

lawn—mowing, for instance, is just as continuous as window clean‘
Nevertheless, there is a general distinction which is reinforced by po
evaluations. Indeed, these evaluations are intrinsic to the do
division of labour.

is needed to show whether it results in men being more prepared t
up some cooking activities or whether it increases expectations so
mothers cook separate meals for different members of the fami
different times.
A fourth residual category, odd jobs, is not considered in the art:
This might lead one to expect that women in the paid labour force rm

Surprisinglyhowever women in employment have slightly: less dom
equipment than full—time housewives. From an analysis» 0 ,
Northampton household survey data, collected in 1987 as part of it
British ESRC Social Change in Economic Life Initiative, Sara Hor
found, that there were no signifieantdifferences in the ownershi

consumer durables between working women and non-working wom'e
In her 1976 essay, Cowan has a tendency to adopt this-latter posit'
seeing the corporate advertisers ‘the ideologuesof the l9205’as the age,
which encouraged American housewives literally to buy the mecha‘ni

markets coincided exactly with the ideological preoccupations of the
domestic science advisers, some of whom even entered into employme
with appliance companies. According to W. and D. Andrews (19 '
nineteenthacentury American women, anxious to elevate their sta

The Australian Consumer Association magazine, Choice, recently fou:
that many appliances wereuseless and that a lot of jobs were better done
manually. For example, they found that a simple manual citrus squeez
was overall better than many of the electric gadgets.

A notable exception is Hardyment’s (1988) book on domestic inventions
in Britain which documents a multitudeof discarded designs, such as
sewing machines, washing machines, ovens, irons, wringers, ‘mangl
and vacuum cleaners, invented and developed between [-850 and 195 .
Unfortunately, the book contains little :analysis of the forces which
shaped their development. At one point, the author makes the intriguing
argument that it was the small electric motor (introduced in the 19203)
more than any other invention which led to thedevelopmentof domestic
machinery along private rather than communal channels. But
Hardyment concludes that ‘the potential of any machine should lie in
the mind of its user rather than its maker’ (1). 199),.echoing herreariier
statement that women should seize the technological means to liberate
themselves. It is disappointing that in a book devoted to the history of
domestic machines so iittle attention is paid to the gender interests
involved in their production.

 

