 
  
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
    
 
   
  
   
   
   
    
   
  
 
  

148 Technology as Masculine Culture Technology as Masculine Culture l49

dwars, have rejected war and the military. Despite these counter-
g tendencies, the received cultural images of women, men and
ndure.

east the recognition that the maleness of the military is only a
throws this masculine ideology into sharp relief. The illusion
ainedr by the refusal to acknowledge certain awkward facts.
the absencerof women from the front lines, armed forces
antly depend upon women, both directly and indirectly as
, workers, nurses, domestic and sexual services to male soldiers.

peace does not only feature in anti- feminist arguments
tancing themselves from the ideology that defines worn
cally inferidr to men, many feminists also see war and $0111
male and believe that women are naturally inclined to pacifis’
noted at the beginning of this chapter that much feminist ‘
conceives of war and weaponry as the direct result of me ,
nature. Women, on the other hand, are seen as nurturing,c "
and non-violent. Their role as mothers is supposed to lead _
value growth and preservation, as against death and dc,
Some writers are inﬂuenced by Carol Gilligan’s (1982)
women’s cognitive and moral development 1s distinctly diff __
that of men According to Ciilligan, women’s concrete and co
style of thinking and moral reasoning involves an orientatio
nurturance and care, through relationship and connectto
appeals are made to women’ s ‘caring’ morality, or ‘maternal__
in Sara Ruddick’s (1983) version, to end war.

In constructing women as inherently peace loving, these fe
are implicity reinforcing a traditional model of masculim

 

,, y‘ 0115, work and even redesigned the weaponry they were making.
y» women are: again playing an important part in weapons pro-

ant culturalsunderstanding of militarism. In fact, as weapons
me rmoreaand more heavily basedton‘electronics, the role of
'onal male military "virtuesiii’isdiminished ~ no enemy is ever
much less physically confronted- while simultaneously the
ice of women’s labour becomes ever greater. For the electronics
tryis largely a women’sindustry, at least as far as production
jncerned. Enloe (-1983, p. 195) gives the example of a'modern navy
r. Forty percent of thecost-of such a vessel is accounted for
tselectronics, andwithoutthose electronics it would be useless in
rn-zsnaval'warfare. Thus, ankarchetypaily male artefact is in
built in largepart by women.r*°:A-durable ideology of mascu-

, taryztechnology is increasingly produced by women. For as the
(darn battlefield becomes transformed by the destructive force of
, y automated technology, the expression of masculinity as
,icalstrengthvand aggression is increasingly overshadowed.

we have seen repeatedly, technology is morethan a set of
icalobjects or artefacts. It also fundamentally embodies a culture
et :ofsocialwrelations made up of certain sorts ofvzknowledge,
chefsrdesiresand practices. Treating technology as can culturehas
led'us tosee the way in which technology is expressive of
asculinityand how, in turn, men characteristically viewsthemselves-
lation to these machines. I have also described how, in order to
aintain this male dominance over new and unfamiliar kinds of
achinery, men willingly adapt and modify their ideas about mascu~
nity I will now explore women’s relation to, or more spec1f1cally
.eir absence from, this technical culture. ‘ 1 » » ,

pathy between women and war has to be seen as in some ways a p
of the very tradition to which 11 may now seem to be a reaction ,
be salutary to realise that the idea of the feminine that ﬁgures in
of the rhetoric of feminist peace groups springs from the same s
as General Barrow’ s conviction that there is no place for womenwo‘
battlefield. (Lloyd, 1986, p. 75)

As Jean Elshtain (1987) indicates, talesof women warriors
fighters are easily buried by the dominant narrative of bellicose
and pacific women. There “are historical accounts of women mil
leaders who have actively ledsoldiers on thevbattlefield as} i '
contemporary examples of women-combatants in national liber
armies around the world. As non-combatants too, mostwom‘e .
readily supported'war aims and efforts, as they did during: the ,
world wars. Although menare responsible for most war and violen
they are also responsible for most organized opposition to war. Man
men, such as the conscientious objectors and male pacifists of'th

 

