56 Reproductése technology

of reliable contraception and abortion, a right often fought for by
women, have meant that for the first time in human history women

are in control of their own bodies.2

Technology as the Key to, Women‘s Liberation,

In the early period of the contemporary women’s movement, reprm
ductive technology was seen as particularly progressive because it
opened up the potential for finally severing the link between sexuality
and reproduction. The much—cited advocate of the use of high tech‘
nology to liberate women was Shulamith Firestone. In The Dialectic
of Sex (1970) she emphasized the need to develop effective corn
traceptive and birth'technologies in order- to free women from the
‘tyranny of reproduction’ which dictated the nature of women’s
oppression. Patriarchy; was seen to be fundamentme about the cone,
trol of women’s bodies, ‘espeei lly their ,sexualityand fertility, by men.

' ’ i ” ppression in their own biology and:

 

 

 

This View located, omen’s

 

and thus make Sexualsquality possible;

Since then, feministaMysishas notsharedFirestone’s enthusiasm
for the artificial womb as the key to women’s liberation. Instead,
feminists have recently been more concerned either to oppose the
experimentation on women’s bodies that the development of these
techniques entails or to harness these techniques in the interests of

fulfilling women’s maternal desires.

Genetic research, bio-technology and infertility treatment are now
making such dramatic advances that Firestone’s ideas no longer seem
to belong in the realm of fantasy.,,The organic unity of foetus and

mother canno longer be assumed now that humaneggs and embryos

can be moved from body to body or out of and back into the same

female body. The major proponents of the possibilities of reproduc—
tive technologies are the scientists and medical practitioners devel-
oping the techniques as well as women who have benefited from them.
Leading infertility doctors argue that embryo research promises the
possibility of eliminating some of the most crippling forms of here—
ditary disease and most importantly, gives hope to previously childless
couples. As one Member of Parliament recently put it:

The object of our interest in medical research into embryology and
human fertilisation is to help humanity. It is to help those who are
infertile and to help control infertility. . . . The researchers are not

   
    
  
 
   
  
   
  
  
     
  
   
   
   
    
 
  

I: Dusters, but scientists. They

 

1X in:theishapegpfectogen‘esis. The application,
of a neutral technologyvvouldfbringzan end-to biological motherhood

Reproductive Technology 57

are medical scientists working in

great human need. We should be proud of them. The

espouse to a s who have been helped are grateful to them. (Pfeffer,

fertile parent
87, p. 81)

L wever all over the world, the use of human emlgyos 1: 51:31:13:
’ ' , ' ‘ rsy. over

in a major source of controve . . .
rch ls becom g ose tighter regulation and define the limits of
' Ethical and religious objections have been
' xorable advance of science and technology

‘ I L ’ ‘ ‘ ' ’ bby calls for
t f reation. The right to life lo .
the sacred realms o hcin human embryology and the practice of

‘ tural
trofertilization. Just as they oppose abortion as an unna

' ' , ' the life and soul of
, ' recreation their concern is for .
ference With p c debate is centred around the question

. The intense publi .
2:225 if any, of the'i'proeeéures and experimental programmes

' ' ’ ed and given resources. . . .
“1112;151:38Europe and North America there 15 growmg debate

ng «feminists over the impact that these novelreproductgietiitin’:
netic technologies will have on women’s lives. This Is a very

' ' were about
' ' ,. s abortion and contraception .
for femtmsts..Wherea " ' ‘ f femininity which equated it

; se new technologies are about fulfill-

. rather than rejecting, thetraditional feminine role.

' ' - ‘ rtilization
' hm ues suchas in Vitro fe ' .
Shared concern Is that tech qf motherhood. Many feminists

'n-vitro fertilization programme reinforces the defirir;
d as a biological imperative rather than (:1 so: at
'lationship. As Christine Crowe (1987, p. 84) observes: IVF oes

'des (and for a few women only) an avenue to

,infertilit ;it provr . _ _ ’ 3 . a
afogical mgtherhood through technological intervention. It IS

hnological fix" in the sense that it does ngt at zany ([13:52: 53:11::
' ‘ " torsandtemeta
initial causes of infertility. Doc ’ d
chnologies as enhancing women’s ‘natutral needditszursrgghlegénags
g ,, " te. Much of the emtms
fertile women as despera ‘ h ose to have an
i ’ ' bother the right to c o .

nvthe notion of chorce and w . have a Chlld.‘ As
I i " 'th the right to choose to . .
bortion can be equated wr . h as mbvmo
A ' ' rt for techniques suc

, 1 see below, feminist suppo . .
lfertillilition is founded in the belief that these technologies incgfats:
women’s choices and that women do indeed have t e rig

 

