26 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

9 A good cross~section of this material can be found ‘ -
Rothschild (1983); Faulkner and Arnold (1985):n 3:261:33? 8333;:
Kramarae (l988). lyIcNeil’s book is particularly useful as it contains a

10 comprehensive bibliography .which is organized thematically.
MacLeod (1987), suggests that although George Ravenscroft is credited
in, the patent records with being the ‘heroic’ inventorof lead-crystal glass
heijas rather the purchaser or financier of another’s invention This
study alerts us to the danger of assuming that patent records have always

' represented the same thing. i
ll t[for a biography of lsady Lovelace, which takes issue with the view of
\ Her as a major contributor to computer programming, see Stein (1985).
doiﬁzggietdigi Kraft (1977) and more recently: Giordano (1988) have

, , _, ' e extensive participation of women i
computer programming. ; n the development of
1.2., TeCTOIOSX as the domination of nature is also'a central theme inthe
.wor _ of critical theorists? such as .Marcuse, for :whom it «is capitalist
,rfations (rathenthan patriarchal relations). which are built into the very
__s {:QCEUIC of technology. ‘Not only the application of technologybut

technology itself is ‘ ~ 4 -. _
,_ sci" . ; ,, ;: domination, (of natursﬁnd men) i methodical,

      
 

    

._ ed upon technology ‘suh'se he tli’ ' d,
the outside" they enter the ver ' L q 'n y an from
, , , y construction ’
(Marcuse, 1968, pp. 223—4). of the technical apparatus
13 gdmstornt is elaborated in the next chapter. See also Part Two of
14 A30 enzre and WaJcman (1985)‘for a collection of these case studies;
, Amram (1984) provxdcs a selection of the patents granted to women

’ during the First World War.

15 Cockburn’s (1983 1985) work is o ' '
, , . , ne rm ort '
gnaw;- length in chapter 2‘ p ant exception discussed at

16 Foran introduction to this literatur ’
.. e, see MacKen -'
(1935); Buker, Hughes andPinch (1987). m and lwajcman

  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  

or

i he Technology of Production:

Making a Job'of Gender

 

 

'c-Capitalists as capitalists and men as men both take initiatives over
xtechnology. Cockburn, The Material of Male Power

.urimages of technologyare starkest in the sphere of production and
.paidwork «from darksatanic mills to clean, automated factories run
most entirely by: robots. )Aftesgggll, people depend for their livelihood
9 )paid'workand'it is here that theyzspend most of their time. This
‘ here some of the fiercest battles over the costs and benefits of
echnological change have been fought. The most notorious involved
male weaVers in nineteenthcentury England destroying the new
machinesand [mills that threatened their jobs. Indeed, the term
' :‘Luddite’ isrstillwused to denote those who oppose technological change
audithus stand in the way of progress.
t’lihealatetwentieth centuryrafinds us in another period of rapid
technological development; Fundamental innovations in microelec-
tronic and telecommunications technology are transforming the
character of! work and thestructureaof the labour force. Existing
, seXual‘divisions of labour, are profoundly implicated in these changes,
and new terrain, for the gendering of work is being opened up. These
arethe issueswhichl williconsiderinthis chapter.
:‘ithether new technology is azliberating force which will eliminate the
dehumanizing aspects of work or whether it will inevitably lead to the
degradation; fragmentationt-and » intensification of technologically-
pacedrwork' depends on your point of view. Theorists of post-industrial
Society such as Alvin Tofﬂer (1980), Barry Jones (1982) and André
Gorz (1982) are optimistic about the radical changes that they believe
aregemerging in industrialsocieties as a result of the ‘microelectronic
revolution’. They argue that technological innovations mean less
labour being expended 0n industrial development,» and a shift from
manufacturing to service-based economies. The jobs destroyed by
microelectronics in industry would be replaced by new occupations
in these newindustries, and degraded and routine work would be

 

 

