62 Reproductive Technology Reproductive Technology 63

    
   
  
      
 
    
   
 
 
    
    
  
 
   
  
  
   
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  

' 'pting, implicitly or explicitly, the use/abuse model of technology,
" ail to appreciate the extent to which technologies have political
"ties. This is where the strength of the FINﬁRAGE analysrs lies.
y view,FINRRAGE are right to argue that gender relations have
toundly Structured the form of reproductive technologies that
become available. , . .
make-this claim however onerdoes not need to conceptualize it
ms of amonolithicmale conspiracy. As hangdon Winner (1980,
5)ahasrsaid: ‘to recognize the political dunensrons m the shapes
echnology does not require that we look for conscrous consprracres
malicious intentions’. Nor does it imply that men are a homo-
us group? While its-is evident that all the stages in the career of
dicalt technology, from its inception and development, through
nsblidation as partof routinecpractice, are a series ofinterlockmg
ctivities, the male" crests involved are specrftcally those of

resources so thatwomen are able ‘to shape the experience of repro
duction according to their own definitions’. ~ ‘
Anraspect of: the politics of reproductive technology left out bytthi
account isthat the‘technologies redefine what counts as illness. ‘Infer‘
tility’ now becomes not a biological state to which the woman mus
adapt her life;but aimedical condition — a problem capable of techno
logical intervention. Theyery- existence of the-technologies change
the-Situation even: if- the woman does not userthem. Her ‘infertility’
is now treatable, and she must in a sense actively decide not to be
treated. In this-waythe technologies strengthen the maternalrfunction
Oftall' women; and: reinforceethe internalization of that: role-for each
woman‘ g; ;1 ’ _ ; .:_ _ _ , f5_ ,_ .1
Indeed, the emphasisplacedaon women’s right to useithese techno;
logies to their own ends tends to obscure the way in which. historical
and socialrelations are: built intoathe technologies themselves-While
recognizing, the social shaping: of womenisichoices in thevsensetof
motivations,:rzfew‘participantsin the debate see that the technologies
from which.) women : choose are themselves shaped socially} V
Techniquesrsuchias iin~vitro fertilization, egg donation, artificial
insemination; and --ssurrogacy :have athe: potential to place the: whole
notion of genetic parenthood, , and . thus family relationships, 2 in ~
jeopardy. ‘HGWCVCI’, only: those technologies that reinforce thevaiue ‘
of‘rhaving onelsfownv’ child; one that is :‘genetically vrelatedcitooneself;
areségbeing developed ‘and,::.c:as Patricia Spallone' (139857;; pple7344)
arguesnhes‘e values determinedthe Warlock/Committee’s assessment
of ‘acceptablef‘risks:to-women’s healthsDespite the dangers; theComL
mittee approvedrzthe use of'in-vitro:fertilization,évwhere egg donation
providesan offspring which is geneticallyrelated-to the?husband~.~ Yet {
the techniqueof eggdonation by uterine“lavage/(embryo :flushingor Q
surrogate embryo transfer) was rejectedon'the basis of-physical risks; '
The medical risks involvedinthis procedurearesnoaxgre’ater, but it
carriesrthe'risk of»runwantedz:pregnancy_inltwhe donor woman. Two
women wouldthen be; sharingeae pregnancy sandthe’ existence-of: this
donor mother-to—be would: challenge the usual ' categories act: another
hood. , This technology was» rejected, not on the grounds ‘that“ it
endangers womenis health, but/:rbecauseé of its socially‘ disruptive
character to the -_identiﬁcation of blood ties with thefamily;
Womenwarezin‘ fact »_selecting from: the very, restricted range of
technological options which are available to them. Thisis glossed over
by the feminist criticsof the FINRRAGE position; By; focusing entire
sexual politics in which the ' new reproductive technologies are
embedded; they pay insufficient attention to the technology itself. “in

 

 

 

    

as; molecular biologists and embryologists are men. .
we: regard technology as neutral but subject. to abuse we Will be
ded to the consequences of artefacts being designed and developed
articular ways. To-make sense of - reproductive technology we need
examine the social and economicszforcesthat drive research forward
atirihibitmore progressive developments. Throughout this 'book
_ ‘:earguedzthat-icertain kinds ofétechnologyrare inextricably linked-
particular: institutionalized; patterns of power andaauthority, and
also ofreproductive:tcchnologiesis :no exception. Men s appro-
ation of) technology here, as in: the {other areas .we have examined,
'1’2heen:decisive'in: attempts tocreate and maintatncontrol over
then. Thiscan best be demonstrated bylooking at the emergence
Specific technologies :andhow theysfiguredn the historical estab~
htnent of male hegemonyin-’Western medicine.

 

he Modicullzuﬁon and Methcnlzation of Childbirth

yered [into Menfs Hands

major focus :of feminist historians of medieinehas been to docu-
nt the central role of: women healersand midwwes before the rise
:modernamedicine. Up until the close of the seventeenth century
endance on childbirth had always been the preserve of women,
:ditionally providing a livelihood for the mic and Widow. It was

