96 D t’
omes ac Technology Domestic Technology 97

    
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
    
  
  
  
 
   
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
 
  
 
 
  

' mphed? In particular, why should women apparently be so com-
'trin,a process that was so damaging to them?

rather‘fthan to its collectivization. -

:gﬂnring-ithe firstwfew decades of this century there were a range:
alternative approachesto housework being considered and expe
mentedswith; These included the development of ‘ commercial serv'l :
.thegiestabitshmentzzof alternative communities and co-Operatives‘l
thezmventronof differentétypes of machinery. Perhaps the :best'know
exponent ofrthe socializationof domestic work was the nineteent

hallxwe believe that millions upon millions of wdmen, for five or six
rations, have passively accepted a social system that was totally out
heir control and totally contrary to their interest? Surely there must
ebeen’ at least One or two good reasons that all those women actively
hose, when choices Were available to them, to reside in single—family
ellings, own their own household tools, and do their own house-

as. (Cowan, 1983, p. 148) '

 

“argue that women just welcomed the new domestic technologies
:us’ethey became available is to come perilously close to techno—
cal determination. On the other hand, how can women have con—
‘ously and freely chosen to embrace the new methods when they
e2been sodiscredited *asygawliberating force? It is tempting in these
nmstances to See worrieneasgiéauped; as passive respondents to
ustrialization, andras victims «50f advertisers.m
" wan": argues ,_ that women embraced these new technologies
_ use theyrima‘de possible an increased'material standard of living

ubstanti’aiiy unchangedexpenditure of the housewife’s time. To
this xtent ‘ women were acting rationally in their own and their
amilies’ interests;
owever, asthe following passégeilltistrates, Cowan seems to find
most convincing explanation :of‘the paths chosen in a set of values
Which_:women subscribed 4 the“privacy’ and ‘autonomy’ of the

only.

. . . when decisions have to be made about spending limited funds,
smost people will still opt for privacy and autonomy over technical
fficiency. and community interest . . . Americans have decided to live
in apartment houses ratherthan apartment hotels because they believe
tsomething critical to family life is lost whenall meals are eaten in
restaurants or all food is prepared by strangers; they have decided to
y Washing machines rather than patronize commercial laundries
rbecauselthey prefer to wash their dirty linen at home . . When given
hoices; inshorﬂmost AmeriCans act so as to preserve family life and
«:wfamily autonomy. The single-family home and the privateiownership
inf-tools: are secial institutious that act to preserve and to enhance the
privacy and autonomy of families.’ - (ibid., p. 150) -

 

this posmble. Writinginthe 1880 ,r Bebeisawelectricity as the great
hbcrator: ‘The small private-kitchens just like the workshOp of tilt
small master- mechanic, a transition stage; an arrangement by whic
time, power-and material areasenselessly squanderedrand‘ waste
(1971;, pp. 338$); The socialization of. the kitchen,would'expandt
allsother domestic work in a large-scale socrahst» economy.“ - ‘ L
gTheimoderngsocialist statesu‘of Eastern: Europe took «up isomeric
these _ 1deas,<sestablishing collective laundry systems in rrapartmen
blocks ,and communal eating «facilities. Whilst these initiatives cer
tainly represented :a different:useofitechnology,they did not challeng
the asexnal dmsioncfz labour insofar aswomenremained'responsibl
for » the ,, housework; albeit: coilectivised. These-”policies on domesti
labour resulted. from: the economic necessity; of drawing Women into
the workforce combined withithe ideology» of equality. It is-stili th
case that communal eating places are used a great deal more in the *
GermanDemocratic Republic than. in the West, and in 1974 it was
estimated that-familieswho-nsed these facilities saved nearly twoaand ‘
a half hours per day compared to families who did not (Kuhrig, 1978',

1313.11). Saving time, however, is notthe-ssolemottve as :rtzhe‘ rhousmg

 

cowan does here depict women as active agents of their own destiny
ratherithan passive recipients of the process. However, an approach
» at gives such primacy to values and to the symbolic importance of

