40 The Technology of Production

essentialist constructions of ‘men’ and ‘masculinity’, we need to

pluralize the term and speak of ‘masculinities’. I will return to a more
extensrve discussion of the nature of masculine technological culture
in chapter 6.

The Relocation of Work

It has been widely noted that the development of microelectronic and
telecommunication technology opens up the possibility of radical
changes in the location of work. Whiteacollar work, for example, can
be decentralized and moved into suburban offices (with lower rents
and possibly lower wages) or it can be moved ‘offshore’ altogether.
Sending work offshore, while not new, is certainly much easier as a
result of greater satellite telecommunications capacity. An interna~
tional sexual division of labour has emerged based on the break-
down of the production process in computer manufacture, with
women performing the labour-intensive assembly of microchips
in various Third World countries. More recently, offshore office
services «have developed where low-wage female labour is used for data
entry and data processing work for firms based in the industrialized
countries. It should be noted, however, that just as in manufacturing
the development of advanced automation systems has reduced the
need for offshore assembly work, so developments in office automa-
tion (such as voice recognition and optical character recognition)
suggest that the use of offshore office services will be a short—term
phenomenon.

The development of computer-based homework, which is also
referred to as ‘telework’ or ‘telecommuting’, illustrates further the
impact that technology has on the location of work. The combination
of computer and telecommunications technology has made it techni-
cally feasible for large numbers of workers whose jobs involve infor-
mation processing to work at terminals in their own homes. The vision
of what has become known as the ‘electronic cottage’, features in all
scenarios of the future of work. Although the number of people
involved in this new form of homework is still small, its potential is
quite large. And, according to many writers from a wide variety of
political persuasions, it is a paradigmatic case-for the future organiza—
tion of work. According to post—industrial theory, the home as a
workplace liberates people from the discipline and alienation of indus-
trial production. Homework offers the freedom of self-regulated
work and a reintegration of work and personal life. Moreover, an
expansion of homework will allegedly lead to much more sharing of

 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  

The Technology of Production 41

paid and unpaid domestic labour, as men and women spend more time
home together.

Whereas the post-industrial theorists see electronic homework as
trof a positive future, for others it evokes the ugly spectre of
eated’ sclf~exploitative piecework. These writers approach tele-
orkwith a set of assumptions derived from the study of traditional
homeworkers. They expect it to become more widespread because it
method of production favoured by employers seeking to resist
competition and protect profits by reducing wage costs. As such it is
. n as part of a more general trend towards the casualization of the
hour force and the growth of the informal sector. Both perspectives

White—collar and service sector homework, both traditional and
Inodern, have been' increasing over the past two decades, even before
einew information technology exerted its full inﬂuence on work
rangements. From research carried out in Europe, America and
ustralia, it is clear that important differences are already emerging
‘ﬁtzween professional and clerical teleworlcers.7 Men predominate
among the professionals, such as managerial staff, computer pro-
amrners and systems analysts, while women are the great majority
~ clerical workers.

Most of these are married women with young children, for whom
omework1s especially attractive because of their household respon-
‘bilities and the lack of affordable quality childcare. However, in
.actice, balancing childcare with paid work has proved difficultfor
any of the women as they have only limited control over a ﬂuc—
ating workload. They are often employed precisely for the ﬂexibility
at this provides for employers. Like traditional homeworkers, elec-
onic homeworkers are typically paid at piece rates and earn substans
any less than comparably skilled employees working in offices, as
ell as having to meet their own overhead costs. Moreover, as
mployers do not give homeworkers employee status, they are not
titled to benefits Such as sickness pay, and have no security of
employment. Electronic homework for clerical women, then, is an
extension of traditional homework with all its disadvantages.

The pattern of work of male professionals is quite different from
that of clerical workers in that they work from home rather than at
, ome. American research has focused on managerial and professional
employees where firms turn to homework in order to retain highly
équaliﬁed workers such as computer programmers. Our Australian
study looked at self-employed programmers who were also able to

 

 

