160 Technology as Masculine Culture

8

10

ll

12

l3

I4

15

l6

l7

 
   
    
 
 

Technology as Masculine Culture 161

back to both early hobbyist machines in the UK and USA and through
the various lineages of interactive games. He particularly examines the
rise of games-playing as the dominant application and argues that the
marketing strategy of the early British producers was geared to the strong
, male hobbyist tradition.
For example, Deborah Brecher (1988) argues that there are gender-based
differences in learning computing; boys’ style of learning is rule-based;
L' girls’ style is holistic. At the conference on which the book is based there
was frequent discussion of the ways women’s more human-oriented tool
approach would result in improved software design.
For two recent articles which draw on the work of both Turkic and
Gilligan, see L. Lewis (1987) and Sutherland and Hoyles (1985.3).
_ For an excellent critique of sex difference research, including Gilligan’s
' work, see C. Fuchs Epstein (1988), especially chapter 4. _
The essays in Richards and Light (1986) share this perspective.

See also Game and Pringle’s (1983, pp. 28-32) discussion of the pol . "
of heavy/light, dirty/clean, mobile/immobile which are, br '
associated with masculinity and femininity. ,.
It should be noted that the boys and men who are typically recruited

 
  
 
 
 
   
   
    
 
   
    
 
 
  
 
 
   
  

In Silicon Valley the majority of women are black, Hispanic,,or:
Furthermore, women electronics workers are also extensively empl
in countries such as the Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan, Sin
and Indonesia. For details, see Enloe (1983, chapter 7). ._ _
Althoughto myamazement I recently heard a chess expert argu'
men were better than women at chess because of their superior ‘v
spatial’ ability. How one would account for the success of co
chess according to this line of argument is beyond me! ' 9
See, for example, Sex Roles, Volume 13, Nos 3-4, August 1985, S
Issues: ‘Women, Girls, and Computers’.

In Britain, Alison Kelly is well known for research in this area. See, v
example, her edited collection (1981). The Girls and Mathematics
at the London Institute of Education has also done excellent work in
area; see for example, V. Walkerdine (1989). In this book they dis H
the commonly held view that boys are better than girls at mathemati
‘Girls, at the nexus of contradictory relationships between gende
intellectuality, struggle to achieve the femininity which is the targe
teachers’ pejorative evaluation. They often try to be nice, kind,~liel
and attractive: precisely the characteristics that teachers publicly hold .
as good. . . . while privately accusing the girls of doing precisely th .
things. Thus they are put in social and psychic double-binds. Few»

~ 2'» ~

of femininity and masculinity as a general process, there is diversit
within them, especially as they are modulated by class and racial d1,
sions. This point is made in several of the articles in Rosemary Dee
(1980) and Madeleine Arnot and Gaby Weiner (1987).

Interesting discussions of video games are contained in chapter 2 of "
Turkic (1984) and Haddon (1988).

This may be particulme important in Britain where computers entered
the school curriculum later than in the USA. Often it was schoo
computer clubs which were first set up and were dominated by boys. ,
Girls were more likely to be introduced to computers afterwards in th
classroom.
See Haddon (1988), p. 211. Haddon traces the roots of the home micro

 

 

