Acknowledgements

In acknowledging the help I received in producing this book, I must
begin with Jenny Earle. She not only read and expertly edited every
chapter, but discussed with me all the ideas, intellectual and political.
I am indebted to her for constant support and encouragement
throughout the entire process.

I started out intending to write an article - it was Donald
MacKenzie who suggested I might as well write a book. I have often
cursed him since! Now it is finished I can thank him for his suggestion
and for initially fostering my interest in this area. He and Tony
Giddens have seen the book through from beginning to end, promptly
reading its many drafts and exhorting me to continue through despon-
dency and ithumour. I am grateful to them both and relieved that
our friendships have survived. Cynthia Cockburn also read many
drafts and her belief in the project was likewise very important to me.

The research and writing for the most part took place while I was
a visitor at the Department of Applied Economics at Cambridge
University. As in the past, this was an excellent workplace for me. I
would like to thank Bob Blackburn, who arranged my visit, Ken
Prandy, Jeremy Edwards, Lucia Hanmer and Kath Wilson all of whom
made me welcome and were a continuing source of encouragement.

While in Cambridge, I was most fortunate to live in a household
with Ros Morpeth and Lol Sullivan. They were both extremely
generous to me, from patiently engaging about the ideas in the book
to fixing my bicycle! In particular, I am grateful to Ros for her warm
hospitality and unswerving friendship. I am indebted to many other
friends in Cambridge, London and Edinburgh and I would par-
ticularly like to mention Karen Greenwood, Lynn Jamieson, Archie
Onslow, Mary Ryan and Michelle Stanworth. For their helpful
comments on particular chapters and for inspiring me with their own
work, I must thank Ruth Schwartz Cowan, Sandra Harding, Maureen
McNeil and others associated with the UK Gender and Information
Technology Network. The last stages of the manuscript were

 

Acknowledgements vii

completed when I returned to Australia and I would like to thank
Pauline Garde, Richard Gillespie, Carol Johnson, Belinda Probert,
Stuart Rosewarne and especially Michael Bittman for helping me with
the final draft.

I had the benefit of a small research grant from the University of
New South Wales and the Australian Research Council. I am grateful
to Alex Heron, Karen Hughes, Jocelyn Pixley, Alison Tilson and
especially Mandy Wharton for their exemplary, if all too brief,
research assistance.

This is by no means an exhaustive list of contributors to my thinking
and writing on gender and technology. A project with as broad a
sweep as this, extending over an intensive two—year period, has of
course involved me in numerous conversations particularly with other
feminists working in the area. Feeling part of a collective feminist
endeavour has sustained me and I hope the end product usefully con-
tributes to this ongoing work.~‘:“~€§’*

