  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
  

38 Domestic Technology
Domestic Technology 89
take over tasks previously done by other family members. For
: 1e, Charles Thrall (1982) found that in families which had 3
age disposal unit, husbands and young children were signifi-
less involved in taking care of the garbage and wives were more
0 do it exclusively. Similarly with dishwashers, which are cited
e of the few appliances that do the job better and save time,
ands were less likely to help occasionally with the dishes.7
ther words, new technologies may reduce the amount of time
_ gage in housework and increase the time spent by women, a
rig, which contradicts conventional wisdom’ (Bose, et al., 1984,
Women have not been the prime beneficiaries of domestic
fology.
omen’s and men’s relationship to domestic technology is a com-
d: of their relationship to housework and their relationship to
nes. Men’s relationship toqtechnology is defined differentlyto
men’s. Cultural notions of mascminity stress competence in the use
repair of machines. Machines are extensions of male power and
‘al- men’s control of the environment. Women can be users of
hines, particularly those to do with housework, but this is not seen
a competence with technology. Women’s use of machines, unlike
is not seen as a mark of their skill. Women’s identity is not
hanced by their use of machines.
e household division of labour is reﬂected in the differential use
echnologies, as Cockburn’s (1985) study confirms. Few of the
:men in her sample used a hammer or screwdriver for more than
ging the occasional picture or mending the proverbial plug. Fewer
, would use an electric drill or even a lawnmower, as ‘men were
oprietorial about these tools and the role that goes with them’
; 19). Generally, women used utensils and implements - the dish-
iasher, vacuum cleaner, car — rather than tools. The skills necessary
' handle these utensils and implements are no less than the male skills
, heir husbands. But, as Cynthia Cockburn points out, women
cannot ﬁx these utensils and implements when they go wrong and are
herefore dependent on husbands or tradesmen, so that finally ‘it is
en on the whole who are in control of women’s domestic machinery
1 d domestic environment’ (p. 220).
echnologies related to housework are not the only technologies to
e found in the home. Indeed the extent to which the meanings and
uses of domestic technologies have a gendered character is perhaps
even more clearly demonstrated with regard to the technology of
leisure. While for women the home is primarily defined as a sphere
of work, for men it is a site of leisure, an escape from the world of

 

