336 The Built Environment

10

ll

12

13

the house; technology, in short, placed the woman in the midst of -_
and not removed from them’. 3
For details of the Tudor Walters Report, see 1. Burnett;
pp.218-«221). _ « ,.
This quotation is taken from an excellent article by G. Allan
Crow (1990). For an account of the Women’s Housing Sub-Co,
see B. McFarlane (1984) and A. Ravetz (1989). ‘
Wright (1981, p. 256) notes that in the USA only 9 per cent of 5171
women worked in 1950 compared with 27 per cent of the
population.
To all intents and purposes of course the television is now the focal
of most living rooms, but it has not displaced the hearth, often?
installed adjacent to the fireplace. . .
See D. Harvey (1989) and E. Soja (1989). One of the few articles
does attempt to draw out the implications of these changes forw
is E. Harman (1983).

See A. Coleman (1985). For the classic critique, which is partic.
interesting for its discussion of the consequences for bringin
children, see J. Jacobs (1962). '
Indeed, some of these architectural principles have even gained r
approval! See The Prince of Wales (1989). " ,
In England too there was much enthusiasm for cooperative “hens
keeping among the more socialist-inclined members of the Garden
Movement. Ebenezer Howard organized extensive experiments
cooperative housekeeping, building quadrangles of kitchenless uni
the Garden Cities of Letchworth and Welwyn. According to Ravetz,
however, the demise of domestic service was an important factor. ‘Itgwx
perhaps this strong male interest in getting the housework done-“wit

inspiration, explains the interest of certain men or the garden city mov,
ment in, collective housekeeping.’ (Ravetz, 1989, p. 192).
The source of information for this paragraph is M. Renner (1988).an
the New Internationalist No. 195, May 1989, issue on ‘Car Chaos’.
The elimination of the interurban rail systems is documented in detail
by B. Snell, ‘Report on American Ground Transport’, Subcommittee'o
Antitrust and Monopoly, Senate Judiciary Committee, 26 February
1974. "‘2
The study of women and transportation is quite new and some interesting
themes are emerging. See M. Cichocki (1980) and S. Fava (1980):
L. Pickup (1988); Women and Transport Forum (1988) and V. Scharff
(1988).

This summary of R. Palm and A. Pred (1978) is taken from A. Giddens
(1984, pp. 114—15). In the original article, the authors make the impor-
tant point that the daily prisms of women in various stages of the life-

cycle and in various social classes are different.

serve to make ‘natural’, and thereby help to generate?
connection between men and machines. That our pr
culture expresses and consolidates relations among me
stant factor in explaining the continuing exclusron of -
as a result of these social practices, women mayw'atta
meanings and values to technology. To emphasize, , ,

 
  
  
 
 
 
  
    
  
   
  
  
  
   
    
  
  
   
  
   
   
  
    
  

hnology and masculinity is commonly supposed

“elink between tec . .
eself-evident and in no need of explanation. But as this chapter

show, the relationship, although strong, is more complex than
’ - / * ' ear.
ayhzt'eﬁarlsrteidp: argued that the; traditional conception of technoiogy
heavily weighted against women. We tend to think about techno (ligy
erms of industrial machinery and cars, for example, ignoringiot er
nologies that affect most aspects of everyday life. The very :1 int-
on: of technology, in other words, has a male bias. This emphargs
technologies dominated by men conspires in turn to dimmis kt e
rgnificance of women’s technologies, such as horticulture, coohtng
'"d childcare, and so reproduces the stereotype of women as 'tiec I}?
gically ignorant and incapable. The enduring force of the in?“ 1-
tion between technology and manliness, therefore, 18 not _ hale:
biological sex difference. It is rather the result of the meter}

ultural construction of gender. .
This chapter will examine the ideological and culturalproc

   
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 

ways in which the symbolic representation of-tee
gendered is not to deny that real differences doexrs
and men in relation to technology. Nor isit tozim
technologically skilled or knowledgeable.~..Rathe
it is the ideology of masculinity that: has,
hnolo .
teeIn 0rd? to understand the underlying-nexus
and technology, I will now consider sever _ it
this identification, and where technology: see

