l4 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

comments that although the relationship between science and techno—
logy has been a major theme in science and technology studies, the
discussion has been plagued by'a welter of conﬂicting definitions of
the two basic terms. The only consensus to have emerged is that the
way in which the boundaries between science and technology are
demarcated, and how they are related to each other, change from one
historical period toanother.

‘In recent years, however, there has been a major reorientation of
thinking about the'form of the relationship between science and
technology. The model of the science-technology relationship which
enjoyed widespread acceptance over a long period was the traditional
hierarchical model which treatstechnology’as applied science. This
view that, science disccavers 'and'technology applies this knowledge in
a routine uncreative way isnow in steep decline. ‘One thing which
practically any modern study of technological innovation suffices-to
show is that far from applying, and’hence depending upon, the culture
of natural science, ritechnologistsrpossess their own distinct cultural
resources; which "providei‘the principal basis for their innovative
activity’ "(Barnes and *Edge, "1982;13:149). Technologists build on,
modify-and extendexisting technology but they do this by a creative
and imaginative processdAnd part of the received culture techno-
logists inherit in the course of solving their practical problems’is non-
verbalynor can itebe conveyed'adequately by «the written word. Instead
it is the individualpractitioner whotransfers practical knowledge and
competence toranother. *izn'ishort; the current mOdel of the science—
technology relationship characterizes science and technology as distin-
guishable sub-cultures" in an interactive symmetrical relationship.

Leaving aside the relationship between technology andiscience, it
is most important to recognizethat the word ‘technology’ has at least
three different layersof meaning. Firstly, ~‘technology’ is a form of
knowledge, asStaudenmaier emphasizes.8 Technological “things’ are
meaningless without the ‘know-how’ to use them, repair them, design
them and make them. That know~how often'rcannot be captured in
words. It is visual, even tactile, rather than simply verbal or mathe—
matical. But it can also be systematized and taught, as in the various
disciplines of engineering. ' '

Few authors however would be cbntent with this definition of
technology as a form of knowledge. ‘Technology’ also refers to what
people do as well, as what they know. An object such as a car or a
vacuum cleaner is a technology, rather than an arbitrary lump of
matter, because it forms part of a set of human activities. A computer
without pmgrams and programmers is simply a useless collection of

    
 
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
 
    
  
    
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology 15

bitsof metal, plastic and silicon. ‘Steelmaking’, say, is a technology:
this implies that the technology includes what steelworkers (lo-pas
llasthe furnaces they use. So ‘technology’ refers to human activmes
rectices. And finally, at the most basic level, there is the ‘hard-
a: definition of technology, in which it refers to sets of physical
sets, for example, cars, lathes, vacuum cleaners and computers.
practice the technologies dealt with in this book. cover all three
gets, and often itis not useful to separate them further. My
rp'ose is not to attempt to refine a definition. These. different layers
leaning of ‘technology’ are worth bearing in mind in what follows.
he rest of thischapter will review the theoretical literature on
‘ der and technology, which in many cases mirrors the debates about
once outlined above. However, feminist perspectives on technology
I there recent and much less theoretically developed than those
. tch have been articulatedzin relation to science. Oneclear indication
of thisis the preponderance 3,; ited collections which have been
rhlished in this area.9 As with many such collections, the articles
do'not share a consistent approach or cover the field in a compre—
henSivc fashion. Therefore I will be drawing out strands of argument
I out this literature rather than presenting the material as coherent

positions in a debate.

 

 

    

 

L hidden from History

,Lstart with, feminists have pointed out the dearth of material on
‘ Women andjtechnology, especially given the burgeoning scholarship
inxthe field of) technology studies. Even the most perceptive and
zhitmanistic works on the relationship between technology, culture
" andsociety rarely mention gender. Women’s contributions have by and
- large beenleft out of technological history. Contributions to Tech—
nology and Culture, the leading journal of the history of technology,
_:provide one accurate barometer of this. Joan Rothschild’s (1983,
:np._xii—-xiv) survey of the journal for articles on the subject of women
found only four in twenty-four years of publishing. In a more recent
book about the journal, Staudenmaier (ibid., p. 180) also notes the
extraordinary bias in the journal towards male figures and the strik—
ingabscnce of a women’s perspective. The history of technology
represents the prototype inventor as male. So, as in the history of
science, an initial task of feminists has been to uncover and recover the
women hidden from history who have contributed to technological

developments.

 

