 
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
    
  
  
  
   
    
  
 
  
  
   
   
 
   
   
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
 
  

lOO Dome t'
5 IC Technology Domestic Technology lOl

is raised in many feminist histories of housework and Cowan
,.p..1:28).presents a detailed example, that of ‘the rivalry between
as, refrigerator (the machine that failed) and the electric

_ and, indeed, until 1925 gas refrigerators were more widespread
heelectric models. Cowan argues that electric refrigerators came

in whichmachine would yield greater profit. The potential market

frigerator-s, as well as the potential revenue for gas and electric

"ycompanies, was enormous. Large corporations, like General

, tic, withvastteehnical and financial resources, were in a position

,hoosewhich type of machine to develop. Not surprisingly, with

'ests in theentire electricity industry, General Electric decided to

net the design of the electrictrefrigerator. The manufacturers of
,' efrigerators, although they had a» product with real advantages

mathe consumer’s point of View, lacked the resources for devel-
pmg and marketing, their, machine.

athe, demise of the gas refrigerator was not the result of
latencies inthe machine itself; rather, it failed for social and
nomicreasons. And in thisggit is structurally similar to the cases
many other abandoned devices intended for the household. This
, illustrates that we have the household machines which we have,
tbecauseof their inherent technical superiority, nor simply because
V consumer preference, but also because of their profitability to large
empanies. ‘In this way economic relations shape domestic techno-
' i ,‘By; itself, the gas refrigerator would not have profoundly altered
dominant patterns of household work in the United States: but
liable refrigerator, combined with a central vacuum-cleaning sys-
m, a: household incinerator, a fireless cooker, a waterless toilet, and
dividually owned fertilizer—manufacturing plants would certainly
ave gone along way to altering patterns of household expenditure
defernunicipal' services’ (Cowan, 1983, p. 144).

,What is so original about Cowan’s work is that she goes beyond a
eneral account of technological change to present a concrete histori—
analysis of contingency in the evolution, design and development
f a specific technology. She demonstrates the possibility of alter-
ative machines and examines carefully the reasons for the path
ken. However, his disappointing that many of the wider concerns
falterrhook disappear here. Her account is wholly in terms of the
interests of, and the power play between, the companies producing

desrgned by men in their capacityras scientists and engineers, rpe
remote fromtthe domestic tasks involved, for useby women: inane
capacttyras houseworkers. And, as we have seen, modern. househ

equipment lSideSigned and marketed to reinforce rath v “
' ' er than - _
the winning household-family pattern. Challeng

it is not only-gender, relations that inﬂuence th
domestic technology. Like other technologies, domesti: tightillg
big business. Particular technologies are produced not in relation
spectre and objectively defined needs of individuals but‘larg‘efl
because they" serve the interests of those who produce them.

arenot-simply- thoseof the manufacturers but L
, , - , also those of
suppliers 0f therenergy needed by these appliances.
quousehold apphances are part of technological systems, such

of an electricity supply system, for example, likes better thanth
widespreaddiffusion of an electricity-using household appliance thy;
Will be. on at tunes of the day when the big industrial consumers ar
not using electricity. Residential appliances (including: heating and
cooling equipment): use about a third of theelectricity generated in
the US today; the refrigerator alone usesabout seven per cent. Unlike
mostother household appliances,the refrigerator operates twenty-
four hoursa day, throughout its life. in fact, many American kitchens
now contain between ‘12 and 20 electric motors. Indeed the drive to
motorrze all household tasks " including brushing teeth, squeezing

of It‘ll: economic and technical capacity for making motors.”
e failure or survrval, on the basis of vested interests, of some -

