 
  
   
    
           
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
   

58 Re -

Praducﬂve Technology Reproductive Technology 59
' cientific research. A parallel is drawn between the way in which
ave: been increasingly controlling the reproduction of animals
mprove’ their stock by experimenting on them, and the extension
's form of experimentation to women. The? female body is being
ggprziated, fragmented and dissected as raw material, or providing
giaboratories’ as Renate Klein puts it, for the technological pro-
' nlof human beings.

_,e.most powerful statement of this is Gena Corea’s image of ‘the
ductive brothel’ which extrapolates from the way animals are
'sedzlike machines to breed, to a future in which women will
the professional breeders, ‘the mother machine’ at men’s com-
.::Some:writers~argue-that-these techniques will actually replace
V at reproduction, guaranteeing the fabrication of genetically-
tbabies. According to this futuristic dystopia, men will achieve
mate control of humant creation and women will be redundant.
any feminists have explained the patriarchal desire for control
at reproduction in psychoanalytic or psychological terms, asso-
Engzitr withtrmale fear of female ‘procreativity and the quest for
crtality. The-potential of this technology to disconnect the foetus
rat/“woman’s body is seen as a specificform of the ancient mascu-
mpulsefto confine and .limitiandé curb the creativity and poten-
poliuting power of femaleggprocreation’ (Oakley, 1976, p. 57), in
.5er womb envy-t Embedded in» this approach, and most
iicitain the; work: of MariauMiesyisa conception of science and
ologyras intrinsically:patriarchal. FINRRAGE states that they
anew feminist science based: on- anon-exploitative relationship
leen nature and ourselves’. Clearly, feminist philosophical theo-
gaabout thermasculinist» character of scientiﬁc objectivity and
nalitytis: being heavily drawn on in current debates about repro-
ive technologies .

ies:;argues .thatgit makes absolutely no difference whether it is
enzocimen who apply andcontrol-this technology; this technology
trinsically an “instrument of domination, ‘a new stage in the
triatchal war against women’; Technology is not neutral but is
Waysbased on», ‘exploitation of and domination over nature, exploi~
,n_~anda_subjection of women, exploitation and oppression of other
les’ (1987,12p. 37). Mics argues that this is the very logic of the
ral sciencesand its model is the machine. For her the method of
hnical progress is the'v-iolent destruction of natural links between
’ ‘ g organisms, the dissection and analysis of these organisms down
W Etheir smallest elements, in order to reassemble them, according
' [the-plans of the male engineers, as machines. The goal of the

Reproductive Technology as Patriarchal Domination

Mo - n w u ;’
st vocal in their opposrtion to the development and application

‘ enetic ' ' '
g , and reproductive engineering are a group of radical feminis

wh _ , , ,
o m 1984 formed FlthRAGE (Feminist International Network

  

 

  
   
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  

   

‘ Van-Centredprcic’e
The dominantf' mode

from us’. For JalnaiI-ianmeri (1985, p. 103):
changing “hands from the individual m

[p a“ if” ch31] “comrol 4' is: :

through marr‘

bodies’f‘: . ,_ », ,

mic“; eggsgggﬁif tshis thegry; techniques Such assuming remit
_ ~ ,, . eszr‘e‘etermin “ ' “ J ' ‘ - i .-~

offer a P owerful means of social‘co among and embryo evaluation

Standgrdpractice. Just as other obst

duced for ‘hlgh’risk’ cases and are no

With genetic engineeri _ogies {as inextricably linked
. . It is techniques such as Vin-vino
With the embryos on which to

 

