  
  
 
 
 
 
  
      
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 

86 Domestic Technology Domestic Technology 87

' thin the home, because of the dominance of single—family residences
' the private ownership of correspondingly small—scale amenities.
veral million American women cook supperseach night in several
«lion separate homes over several million stoves’ (Cowan, 1979,
9). Domestic technology has thus been designed for use in single-
ily households by a lone and loving housewife. Far from liberating
en from the home it has further ensnared them. This is not an
itable, immutable situation, but one whose transformation
ends on the transformation of gender relations.
he relationship between domestic technology and household
our thus provides a good illustration of the general problem of
‘nological determinism, where technology is said to have resulted
ncial changes. The greatest influences on time spent on housework
e in fact come from non-technological changes: the demise of
inestic servants, changing: standards of hygiene and childcare, as
s the ideology of the houséiiife and the symbolic importance of

By mum of we pm”,
Eletlrrk‘ux (madman!
(here shown enlarged)
cancers are made «was
masters. Wuhan: any
effort. awry parcel: of
m. entiﬂujiis quickr‘y
«ms! and zit:- form:
9;: sportem‘t‘ dean.

  

  

omestic technology has notgdirectly reduced the time spent on
sework, has it had any effect on the degree of gender specialization
ousehold labour? Is the generalrelationship women and men have
echnology itself a significant factor in determining the division of
arbour in the home?
‘ vailable evidence suggests that domestic technology has rein-
,rced the traditional sexual division of labour between husbands and
es and locked women more firmly into their traditional roles.5
ecause technologies have been used to privatize work, they have
urnulatively hindered a reallocation of household labour. Some
usehold appliances may have been substituted for a more equal
allocation of household labour, in particular reducing the amount of
me men engage in housework.
The allocation of housework between men and women is in fact
much the same in households where the wife is employed and those
which she is not. Husbands in all social classes do little housework.
:here men do undertake housework, they usually perform non-
outine tasks at intervals rather than continually, and frequently the
ork is outdoors. This is in marked contrast to women’s housework,
he dominant characteristic of which is that it is never complete.6
Task-specific technologies may develop in such a way that women

Electroluxis embodimen maemtsm: Miss u : mighty clean behi mr’e times,
to a large extent solved the maid problem by picture rails. seams. and cushions with the same
enabling many names to do their own house facility and thoroughnessesildoes mgsand floors.
cleaning Wuhoul effort and in a little time. There is There are no tmublesome attachments: nothing to
no phase of cleaning to: which i! 35 not adapted» get out of order: nothing to replace,

       
 
   

 

   
  
  
 
   
  
  
  
   
  
   
   
   

TELEPHONE FOR FREE DEMONSTRATION IN YOUR OWN HOME

”TRIM “mesa

E
t
t
i
i
l
stone), Newcomer We; Melbourne. Witter. (Mung. Kola". Adelaide and New Zulu-id i

, ._r .7 “WW, M-w,r.-~-,--~----_-.i. ---_.-..»c_mmi

4.1 Advertisement from The Home, 1 April 1926

expected to provide entertainment, emotional support, and sexual
gratification. The burden of satisfying these needs fell on th
housewife. ‘

With home and housework acquiring heightened emotional signifi’
cance, it became impossible to rationalize household production alert
the lines of industrial production (Ravetz, 1965). Cowan graphical}?
captures the completely ‘irrational’ use of technology and labou

