150 Technolo as Mosculin C t
9y 9 ul ure Technology as Masculine Culture lSl

  
 
  
   
  
      
   
  
   
  
 
   
 
   
   
  
  
    
   
   
  
 
  
  
   
 
   
   
    
  
 
   
 
   
  
   
  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  

eople, are already sex-typed when they enter the workplace.
women never approach the foreign territory of these masculine
., his sex segregration at work reflects theifact that patriarchal
'nS'.;are an integral part of our entire social system. In modern
’ ' his the education system, in conjunction with other social

Women and Machines: Cognition or Cultusz

Given the resilience of this association between technolog
ness, how dowomen think about and experience technol
are the mechanisms, both formal andinformal, that fest
three the cultural stereotype of: women as technologically;
indeed invisible in technical spheres? .,
. The continuing smale monopoly’of weapons and mocha
IS perhaps not so difficult to understand giventhe weight
tradition and custom borne by these instruments: of war
duction. The old. story that you had to be strong, toned
machmeshad .at. least some credibility in this z'contextr .
dommanceof new technologies is, at first sight,much<mor
It_was: a commonly-held «expectation that with the :develo
microelectronics, and the decreasing importance of heavy
technology, the gender stereotyping of technology would
Computing is a crucial example, becauseas a completel
of technology hired the potential to break the mould.
sexualidivisions, there arethree distinct paths along ’whic
nology might have developed. Computing could have bee
neutralwith‘no basicdifferentiation between, female and ma
Or, it could have been a technology that women appmpria H
allnthe image of new electronic computer technologyfits wit
mmtym that‘it is clean, sedentary work’involvingirotetask
precismn and nimble typing fingers. Yet recent evidence on the
gap in access to computers at school, at play and at home, sup
the. idea that our culture has already deﬁned computers."
eminently male machines. Numerous British, Americanzand Arts 4
surveys show that boys vastly outnumber girls wherever th
discretionary use of these machines such as in school compute
computer summer camps, at home and in games arcades
response to thisdisturbing trend, a number of feminist-resea
have recently investigated the relation of women and girls to
puters. These studies afforduseful insights into the marginaliiati
of women from technology more generally. ' ‘

tions, which helps to perpetuate gender inequalities from
ationrto generation. Schooling, youth cultures, the family and
as’smediarall transmit meanings and values that identify mascu—
ﬁith- machines and technological competence. These social
xts are intertwined and mutually reinforcing, but they should not
nisim'ply as external forces. Individuals actively participate in,
and even help reproduce by resisting, these social practices. An
nt'illustrationof the relationship between sexuality, schooling,
ultures and employment is provided by Paul Willis in Learning
boar (1977). lie-describes how working-class boys end up in
tug-class jobs by stressing. he role that the demonstration of
ulinityplaysin valorizing low status labour. The class and
erednnature of traditionalmanual labour is created, maintained
reprOduced fthrough‘these interconnected cultural processes.
fw does a completely new technology like computers, that may
utomaticallyiconform to preexisting patterns of ’ gender differ-
“ti‘ation,ifitrinto these processesflgFocusing on computers may enable
'fasee more clearlyr'the social“ mechanisms through which a new
hnology,becomes‘rintegrated into- the masculine cultural system.
Schools are‘the most obvious places where young people first come
contactiwith computers; There is now an extensive literature on sex '
reotyping-in general‘in schools, particularly on the processes by
"ch‘girls and boys are channelled into different subjects in second-
‘ nd tertiary education, and the linkrbetween education and gender
.sionsin'the’labour market. As with «scientific and technological
as of tertiary education generally, the sex ratio of computer science
very marked. Since at least the mid-19705 there have been anti-
discrimination legislation, equal opportunity programmes and other
[government-Land- non-government initiatives in many countries to
.edress this imbalance. Despite allrth-is effort, the number of girls
aking computer science at British universities has been decreasing.
The proportion of female applicants for undergraduate level com-
puter science courses dropped from approximately 28 per cent in 1978
torl3 per cent in 1986 (Hoyles, 1988, p. 9). In fact there are fewer
women applying for computer science courses now than nine years
, age although the subject has doubled in size. Similar situations are

i found in other countries.

Computing Inequality at School

Although the work-related cultures which we have examinedéiha"
their own dynamics, they are also the result of cultural processes tli
take place outsrde of work and that are carried into it. Technologies

