2 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

of science in demonstrating that women have in fact made important
contributions to scientific endeavour. The biographies of Rosalind
Franklin and Barbara McClintock, by Anne Sayre (1975) and Evelyn
Fox Keller (1983), respectively, areiprobably the best known examples.
Recovering the history of women’s achievements has now become an
integral part of feminist scholarship in a wide range of disciplines.
However, as the extent and intransigent quality of women’s exclusion
from selence became more apparent, the approach gradually shifted
from looking at exceptional women to examining the general patterns
of women’s participation.

There is now considerable evidence of the ways in which women
have achieved only limited access to scientific institutions, and of the
current status of women within the scientific profession. Many studies
have identified the structural barriers to women’s participation, look-
lng at sex discrimination in employment and the kind of socialization
and education that girls receive which have channelled them away from
studying mathematics and science. Explaining the undenrepresentation
of women in science education, laboratories and scientific publica-
tions, this research correctly criticises the construction and character
of feminine identity andbehaviour encouraged by our culture.

However these authors mainly pose the solution in terms of getting
more women to enter science - seeing the issue as one of access to
education and employment. Rather than questioning science itself
suchstudies assume that science is a noble profeSsion and a worthy
pursuit and that if girlsrwere given the right opportunities and encour-
agement they would gladly become scientists in proportion to their
numbers in the population. It follows that remedying the current defi-
ciency 1s seen as a problem which a combination of different socializa—
tron, processes and equal opportunity policies would overcome.

This approach, as Sandra Harding (1986) and others have pointed
out, locates the problem in women (their socialization, their aspira—
trons. and values) and does not ask the broader questions of whether
and in what way science and its institutions could be reshaped to
accommodate women. The equal opportunity recommendations,
moreover, ask women to exchange major aspects of their gender iden—
tity for a masculine version without prescribing a similar ‘degendering’
process for men. For example, the current career structure for a pro—
fessional scientist dictates long unbroken periods of intensive study
and research which simply do not allow for childcare and domestic
responsibilities. In order to succeed women would have to model them—
selves on men who have traditionally avoided such commitments. The

 

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology 3

equal opportunities strategy has had limited success precisely because
:it fails to challenge the division of labour by gender in the wider

society. The cultural stereotype of science as inextricably linked with
masculinity is also crucial in explaining the small number of women

in science. If science is seen as an activity appropriate for men, then
it is hardly surprising that girls usually do not want to develop the

skillsand behaviours considered necessary for success in science.
When feminists first turned their attention to science itself, the

problem was conceived as one of the uses and abuses to which science

has been put by men. Feminists have highlighted the way in which
biology has-been used to make a powerful case for biologically deter-
mined sex roles. Biology has been central to the promotion of a view
of women’s nature as different and inferior, making her naturally
incapable of carrying out scientific work. For example, sex differences
,in-visual—spatial skills aresaid toexplain why there are so many more
male scientists. In confront rig biological determinists, many
feminists inquired as to how and why the study of sex differences had
become a priority of scientific investigation. They set out to demon-
strate that biological inquiry, and indeed Western science as a whole,
were consistently shaped by masculine biases. This bias is evident,
they argued, not only in the definition of what counts as a scientific
problem but alsoin the interpretations of research. It followed that
science couldnot be genuinely objective until the masculine bias was
eliminated. As we shall see below, this approach leaves unchallenged
the existing methodological norms of scientific inquiry and identifies
only bad science and not scienceas-usual as the problem.

, The radical political movements of the late 19605 and early 19703
also began with the question of the use and abuse of science. In their
campaigns against an abused, militarized, and polluting science they
argued that science was directed towards profit and warfare. Initially
science itself was seen as neutral or value-free and useful as long as
it was in the hands of those working for a just society. Gradually,
however, the radical science movement developed a Marxist analysis
of the class character of science and its links with capitalist methods
of production. A revived political economy of science began to argue
that the growth and nature of modern science was related to the needs
of capitalist society. Increasingly tied to the state and industry, science
had become directed towards domination. The ideology of science as
neutral was seen as having a specific historical development. One of
the most characteristic formulations of this position, associated with
the radical science movement, was that ‘science is social relations’.

