   
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
   
  
   
  
     
     
  
  
  
    
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
  
   
  

126 The Built Environment The Built Environment 127

owever, what appears to be an ideal solution to individual needs is
,creasingly illusory as more and more people choose, or are forced
make, similar decisions. In terms of individual mobility, the utility
the motor vehicle is diminishing as the number of cars on the road
calates. The prosperous 1950s and early 19605 were characterized
booming car ownership and, at least in the US and Australia, the
:was expected to be the future of urban transport. The land use
d: transport planning procedures which emerged in the mid 19505
ded from the outset to be strongly associated with planning for

simply be superimposed on a preexistin '
_ . g socral order and »
formative in themselves. be trans

Automobiles: Technology in Motion

So far I have discussed the gender dimensions of housing design -
urban. layout. However, any discussion of the physical built enviro
ment is incomplete without discussing the transport technologyith
binds these spaces together. In particular the automobile is now‘a
eminent feature of the urban environment. '-
The invention and mass production of the car has greatly influen “
the shape of the modern city. One has only to think of cities like
Angeles and new planned towns like Milton Keynes, to be remind:
of this. From the beginning of the modern movement in architectur
architects like Le Corbusier and Frank Lloyd Wright saw cars“
integral to the design of the city. In this section I will argue that th
transport system, and in particular the dominance of the car restrie
women’s mobility and exacerbates women’s confinement to {he horn
and the immediate locality. Women’s and men’s daily lives trace ve'
different patterns of time, space and movement, and the modern ci
is predicated on a mode of transport that reflects and is organizcd

, . . . .
around mens interests, activmes and desires, to the detriment
women.

pawned more and more traffic, becoming badly congested very soon

ratheir completion. The obvious response to traffic congestion was
build more roads which were justified on technical grounds in terms
time, fuel and other. perceived saving to the community from

   

filling prophecy of congestion, road building, sprawl, congestion
d more road building.’ (Newman, 1988, p. 15)

The net result is that London rush-hour traffic averages about 7
miles per hour; in Tokyo cars average 12 miles and in Paris 17. By
emparison the average daily travel speed of 33 miles per hour in
cuthern California, where there are probably more miles of freeways
fan, anywhere else in the world, may seem impressive. However as
[ esult of a much lower population density than European cities, the
advantage of speed is offset by the much longer distances required to
gavel to work. The irony is that a horse and buggy could cross
'owntown Los Angeles almost as fast in 1900 as an automobile can

ake this trip at 5pm today.

otorwoy Madness

ere is nothing inevitable about this rise and rise of the road. The
tate has played a major role in decisions about the extent to which
zansport investment is in roads as opposed to public transport. Again , ,
yacomparison with Europe, American and Australian cities are
haracterized by a much heavier dependence on cars. Average ‘
rustralian cities have four times, and US cities three times, more road
apply per person than average European cities (Newman, 1988, p. 6 .,
he politics of transport is dominated by conflict between roadand
grail lobbies, and technical discussions about efficient trans a
' systems mask huge financial interests involved. The full extent 0
subsidies to road transport are rarely exposed or documented
expensive maintenance of motorways so heavily used by private

 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  

spaces - at home, work, the supermarket and everywhere that peopl
are supposed to congregate. Small wonder that in American cities

close to half of all urban space is dedicated to the automobile in Le, it
Angeles, the figure reaches two-thirds. ’

 

