The Built Environment US

  
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
    
  
   
 
   
    
   
  
 
  
  
 
  

332 The Built Environment
,, at theme of feminist theory has been the spatial separation
biicand private spheres, and the restriction of women to the
o, ever, the public/ private dichotomy cuts across the work/

' ctionin: manyways; for example, the ,‘private’ home con—
thin’it public and privatespaces. As the house was turned into
‘- ringétheiVictorian period, the lay-out of the building was
. ransformed.:There was marked spatial segregation of the
th::.;between- husband and wife and master and servant. The
quarters werezfurthest from the front door - domestic sen
"concealed from the public parts :of the house.
zones Were created for different activities such as cooking,
ashing,» sleeping, [and formal social functions, with public
uaterspaces clearly demarcated. One room at the front of the
eitpariourpwas now set aside specifically for social inter-
andécontained the be ifittingsandifurniture. Eating now took

gseparatesdiningr' "in “fire kitchen was isolated at the back

onseandovas spacious enough, toaccommodate several women
g.z«z‘:Segregating the mess and smell of food preparation from
'al:«;zritual rofjeating became an important hallmark of respect—
andmeant thatthe kitchen became ideally, as remote as possible
e livingixrooms, no matter thecost in servants’, or wife’s time
labour’ . (ibid., p. 383). Overall, then, hierarchy and location
oms, reflected the stratified“»rrelationships within the home ~
acterized by the subordination of servants to the family, family

and wife to husband.

patriarchal relations, and gives concrete expression to them
first part of this chapter I will chart the development of ":ee""
house. in so doing, I will be arguing that architectural chart es
domestic arena are not simply driven by technological advag
are about‘expectations of women and men and in arti I l I
the domestication of women. ’ p cu at

The Ideal Home

Victorian Values

 

 

of. domestic life that occurred in the Victorian period in both-E
and America can be understood as an attempt to check what
perceived as the disintegration of values in a rapidly changin so
by, placing the home, symbolically, in direct opposition to theg’:

petiOd:;1>180§-138'50 saw the emergence of new conceptions of, the

s a

rnxvietorran English society. The ,,‘-creation of the middle-class
invoicedthenseparation of home and workplace, and the identifica
ofthesahomeaasa private place, in which family relationships wet
primaryimportance. It was women’s responsibility to create a:
as,;1‘tlln(liikee.the world of business and industry as possible, a plac
if; ed tgéwldfngfinitilietﬁf 1moral rectitude. In the responsibilities
e ome,_1t was the ursuit L « I

emphasrzed most strongly for the sake 13f its ggrgagtyegﬁéh
gremliersof the household,- especially the children. Located bet-w
, e aristocracy and gentry on the one hand and wageiabourers on
other, [111: was the middle ranks who erected the strictest'bou d” '
begleen private and publicspace” (p. 359). ~ L n art
lives 23:12:“ was seen as the most appropriate settingfor worn
world Vict 'c nary from therrgours and corruption of theoutsi
close £0 Email 1 eology perceived womenandchildren as especi
d , ,_ -na. ure,.much moreso than men who could withstand t

angerous Inﬂuences assocrated with supposedly unnatural cit l'f
provrded they had theirretreat at home. The ideology of the 3lliolme
it: a haven had its corollary in the idealization' of the rural village as
”2:15:12: settting fordcgmmunity life. What has been-called ‘the Beau,

- epi omize y the Victorian villa in a gardens b

we shall _ . u urb. As
century 2:: i311: E:rnage has endured and been reproduced in twentieth-

"Home as‘ a Machine for Living

nineteenth-century ideas about what con-

med? a home havepermeated twentieth-century life and thought,

has thephysical and emotional division between public and private

heres, there'have been major changes in our image of an ideal home .

, antly, the nineteenth—century view of the home as a

onghold of beauty and spiritual virtue was replaced by the idea that

the home’s main function was as the source of physical welfare and
ealth’ (Forty, 1986, p. 1 14). Efficiency rather than beauty became the
ganizing principle of the home, and the relative importance
tachedto thevarious roomschanged, with the kitchen becoming the
- ere oil-the house. ,

These changes: reflected the growth of a middle class without
servants and the mechanization of the home. The early years of the
., twentieth century saw the development of the domestic science

 

