 
 
  
  
   
  
    
   
   
 
 
  
  
  

’ T hnol 65
64 Reproductive Technology Reproductive ec 09y

 

midwives who came to women in labour and who assisted women in
the process of giving birth. Their experience and «knowledge about
birthing and about birth assistance was passed from one generation
of women to the next. Throughout the eighteenth century a bitter an
well documented contest took place between female midwives and the
emerging male—dominated medical profession, as to who would have
control over intervention in the birth process (Ehrenreich and English, "
1979 and Dennison, 1977). It emerges from these accounts that a par
ticular technology played a crucial role in determining the outcome.

In England from the 17203 onwards an increasing number of men '
were entering midwifery in direct competition with women. Before
that time, surgeons (an exclusively male occupation) had only been
called in for difficult cases where natural delivery was not possible.
They had carved out this work in the thirteenth century by forming
surgeons’ guilds which gave them the exclusive right to use surgical
instruments. Before the invention of forceps however there was little
they could do except to remove the infant piecemeal by the use of
hooks [and perforators, or to perform a Caesarian section on the body
of the mother after her death (Donnison, 1977). Obstetric forceps
were introduced by the Scottish apothecary William Smellie by the
17305 (see figure 3.2).

The forcepsenabled its user to deliver live infants in cases where
previously either child or mother would have died, and also to shorten
tedious labour. According to custom, midwives were not allowed to
use instruments as an accepted part of their practice. The use of
forceps thus became the exclusive domain of physicians and surgeons,
and was associated with the emerging profession of medicine. The
introduction of forceps gave these men the edge over female midwives
who were adept at the manual delivery of babies and who had all the
practical knowledge about birth and birthing. As soon as this techno-
logy was introduced it was seized upon by physicians, who used it far
too often, even in the contemporary opinion of the inventor himself.
The outcome of the struggle that ensued was that the midwives lost
their monopoly on birthing intervention, which became the province
of the profession of medicine. For the first time in history childbirth,
which had always been ‘women’s business’, had been captured by men.

Clearly the ascendancy of male obstetrics was the result of a number
of interrelated factors, a critical element being the movement of
childbirth from home into the newly established lying—in hospitals.
However, the invention of one of the first technological aids to birth-
ing-provided a crucial resource for male medical practitioners. It is
telling that the public debate precipitated by the entry of men into

 

 

 

 

- Obstetric forceps as ‘artificial hands’ .
Source: William Smellie, A Sett of Anatomical Tables, 1754, plate 16.

' ' ivoted around the use of instruments such as obstetric
Tgifr‘ih: doctors’ practice of midwifery was becoming distinguisall:
hie by its very technical aspect’ (Faulkner, 1985, p. 93). Young to t
‘ dwives were often incompetent and frequently used mstrumen s
nnecessarily to hasten the birth and save their time, often damagitnlgl
he mother and killing the child. The misuse of instruments was cf 1;
ommon enough to attract the followmg crttrcrsm from a lea “ig
medical practitioner, a James Blundell of Guy s 1—losprtal, whowrov:
man that some men seemed to suffer from a sort of mstrnctr
impulse to put the level and the forceps into the vagina (DozrliltlusorilE
11977, p. 50). Thus technical intervention rapidly became the h ma

of male medical practice. . .
This is not to say that birthing women were necessarily hostile to

increased technical intervention. In the early decades of thlS century;
here was considerable feminist agitation. In favour of the use 0
anaesthesia during labour, which male physrcrans were then opposrng.
Women took up the cause of drug-induced ‘twrhght sleep becagﬁee
they saw it as ‘the newest and finest technique available to relieve us
acute pain of childbirth. Physicians’ objections to its use took varro

