28 The Technology of Production

consigned to machines, releasing human beings to more creative and
more fulﬁlling work. In the future some of this work may even shift
to the home or ‘electronic cottage’, as computerization will eliminate
the need for people to work in large-scale units of production.

Another version of this optimistic view has recently emerged as the
socmlogy of work has become increasingly concerned with the issue
of ‘flexible specialization’ and ‘neo~Fordism’. The focus here tends to
be on the potential for job enhancement presented by new technology.
To put it simply, automation will increase skill requirements. It is
argued that technological change, especially in conjunction with the
use of Japanese management techniques, will require a smaller, but
skilled and ﬂexible workforce, prepared to undertake ongoing train-
mg to facilitate the adaptation of skills to new technology.‘

Rising unemployment levels in advanced capitalist societies have
prompted a more pessimistic view of technology’s impact on work.
In contrast to the ‘post-industrial’ scenario, such commentators
believe that automation is associated with degraded, deskilled, and
devalued jobs, stressful and dangerous work, employer monitoring
of employees, and work speed-ups, in which workers are paid less for
domg, more. As workers’ skills are built into the technology, those
fortunate enough to retain a job are relegated to the position of
machine minders. (This scenario is vividly depicted in Kurt
Vonnegut’s science fiction novel Player Piano.) The increasing use by
management of surveillance systems built into the machinery itself to
morntbr and record output will serve to intensify the exploitation of
labour. ‘

Conducted in these terms, the debate begs many questions. Is the
technology of production an independent force determining the
orgmuon of work? In particular, does it affect the nature and
experience of work for women and men alike? Or is the development
and introduction of particular technologies itself shaped by existing
socral «relations, including those of gender?

Although new technologies do represent a force for change, I will
be arguing that the outcomes are constrained by the pre—existing
organization of work, of which gender is an integral part. Technical
change has not substantially undermined sexual divisions in the labour
market and occupational segregation between women and men. This
raises the question of what has shaped particular technological
developments in the first place. If technology is designed with job
stereotypes in mind then it is hardly surprising that sex segregation
IS being further incorporated into the workplace. Accordingly, the
chapter will go on to explore the ways in which the sex of the

 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
 
   
   
 
  
  
  

The Technology of Production 29

workforce and gender relations in the workplace themselves pro-
oundly affect the direction and paceof technological innovation.

or

e Impact of Technology on the Sexual Division of
hour

Office Automation and Women's Employment

 

Whilst women have always worked in large numbers, it is over the last
hrce decades that they have come to comprise nearly half the labour
one in advanced industrial economies. Even so, many of the pro—
agonists in the debate on work and technology have been oblivious
0 gender issues, implicitly concerned only with those sectors of pro-
duction in which male workers predominate. Since the mid—1970s,
however, feminist researchers and activists have addressed the effects
of automation on women-’s employment.
The introduction of computer-based technologies into offices has
been the focus of one strand of this research, mainly because the
majority of clerical and secretarial workers almost everywhere are
, women. It is also the case that these groups are being dispropor-
tionately affected, as the office is the prime site of technologically
{ induced change. This research forms the basis for many of the
‘ generalizations about women’s work experience.
, Optimistic and pessimistic views-can be discerned in the various
, studies on office automation.2 Some authors suggest that the intro-
duction of word processing equipment is making the traditional
secretarial job obsolete. But, rather than being deskilled, they see
p the job of secretary as being replaced by different types of para-
professional jobs. Routine typing would be minimized leaving the
office worker to take on more skilled, satisfying work as well as
more responsible duties. Technological advances will improve the
quality of work, reducing drudgery and promoting more integrated
work processes. This optimistic vision attaches great significance
to the liberating potential of new office technologies, seeing in them
a solution to women’s traditionally limited and limiting work
opportunities.

Much more common among feminist writers however has been a
pessimistic view of the impact of microelectronic technology on
women’s work, often expressed in a strongly anti-technology stance.
A major concern in the women’s movement has been the implications
for women’s health and safety of widespread use of video display
terminals, from eye strain and headaches to the risks of radiation for

