36 The Technology of Production

      

3 , 0 enter copydire‘dtl
new echnolog‘y‘ireprese

 

 

 

   

      

   

   
  

 

to

a Q or
typesetting eq ipment to Maia keyboard work: To var

3110;323:112; :gethexclusion of unskilled women from the trade. It
and religious r . actrthis exclusronary strategy hasalso involved racial
portion of whiltaejjx: 112:5 Skilled printing workers have a higher pro-
and unskilled. g, , axon Protestants among them than the semi-
Hav- _: o n e T t I {
used t etcrtlgnréoggtectlbout the way inwhich organized male workers have
needs to be saiclrth ygrntam power overiwomen in the workplace : it
dominance over [as - is 18 not a once-and-foraall achievement. Male
women’sdirect effmachinery 1s constantly under threat -‘both by
in seekin , t orts to undermine it, and by actions of :emplo er
3 o undermine skilled male workers and cheapen their labSt’m:

”gigs; 39:1]; econgmons, skilled men do lose out and women enter
technological chaiio 5.1 The process of feminization is often partrof
same tasks unde gel.1 n such cases,. women rarely perform exactly the
formed, inh r e same conditions; as the men formerly er—

. erent in this process of technological change is the trim-

  
 
 
  
     
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
     

    
  
 
 

ecombuter ‘
they-’managedito mam ' ‘ " ‘ ’ ying degrees ‘
_ _. , tam their/craft control '
w ‘ _ _ ; : p _ even thou hth '
as techQOIOglcally redundant. 'However,’their strategygof militia:

   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   

   

The Technology of Production 37

tion: of jobs. However, and this is the crucial point, the
uctiontof female labour is usually accompanied by a down-
of: the skill content of the work and a consequent fall in pay

ob.

 

ll and Technical Competence

softensaid that women are low paid because they are unskilled;
i‘nlyéwomen’s work tends to fall into the unskilled or semi-skilled
tiesof?officials:classifications. But the crucial question is how
eﬁnitionsrofskillare established. Totake a simple example, women
assemble digital watches and pocket calculators require con-
bler‘ manual= dexterity (‘nimble fingers’), the capacity for sus-
deattent-ion to detail and excellent hand—eye co—ordination. Yet
‘ "capacities are not defined as ‘skills’. Nurses provide another
*ple of an occupationtthattitfequires a great deal of training and
, as well as technical knowledge. However nursing is not
night of as a technical job because it is women’s work. Moreover,
sessuchwworkr has been socially constructed as unskilled it has
een undervalued. Consequently ‘women’s work’ is compara-
rw paid.- The workof women is often deemed inferior simply
usedt‘ is womenzwho doting-g »
whas «iti come-about that women have failed to achieve recogni-
f-stheskills: required by-their work? Although it is the case that
omen iworkers have generallysbeenrefused- access to training in tradi—
ally masculine areas of, work, the basis-for distinctions of skill in
en’s andmen’s work is nota simple technical matter. Deﬁnitions
lécanshave’moreto-do with ideological and socialconstructions
anrwitheteehnical:competencieswhieh are p03sessed by men and not
-omen.z-Itzis a questionof workers’ collective efforts to protect and
are theirirzconditions of employment -— by retaining skill designa-
"n‘s for their own work and defending that skill to the exclusion of
idersrTheseefforts have beenpredominantly by and on behalf
he male-working class. They“ have been directed against employers
horhave regularly tried to find ways of substituting cheaper workers

expensive skilled labour.

 

 

 

fending skillgpreventing ‘dilution’, has almost always meant block-
mgwomen’s access to an occupation. Moreover employers’ own per-

eptionsof the suitability of women for particular types of work must
miiipart be responsible for the craft : workers’ success in excluding
women from skilled work (Liff, 1986). Otherwise one would expect

 

 

