38 The Technology of Production

the sexual division of labour to be a much more contested area both _‘
for management and unions than it is. Skilled status has thus been
traditionally identified with masculinity and as work that women i

don’t do, while women’s skills have been defined as non—technical and
undervalued.

Thus there are important connections between men’s power in the
workplace and their dominance over machinery. Likewise, there are
important connections betweenwomen’s relative lack of power and
their lack of technological skills. In chapter 1 I said that technology
includes not just things themselves but the physical and mental know-
how to make use of these things. Know-how is a resource that gives
those who possess it a degree of actual or potential power and we have
seen above how this knowuhow has been central to the class politics
of technological work. It is also central to the sexual politics of tech—
nological work, as technical competence is a key source of men’s
power over women « of the capacity, for example, to command
higher incomes and scarce jobs.

How can we begin to understand the enduring force of this iden~
tification between technical skills and masculinity without making the
mistake of treating technology as inherently masculine? We can start,
as Cockbum does, by taking seriously the requirement to understand
the masculinity of technology as a social product. Men’s affinity with
technology is then seen-as integral to the constitution of male gender
identity. ‘Technology enters into our sexual identity: femininity is
incompatible with technological competenceito feel technically com-
petent is to feel manly’ (Cockburn, 1985, p. 12).

Once we recognize that gender construction is an ongoing ideo-
logical and cultural process with a long history, then the focus shifts
to analyzing the social practices involved. The way in which the
present technical culture expresses and consolidates relations among
men becomes an important factor in explaining the continuing exclu-
sion of women.

This type of analysis stresses the importance of the cultural aspects
of gender relations, and shows the way that gender is an integral part
of people’s experience in the workplace. This is illustrated in
Cockburn’s (1983) study of compositors, where she ascribes the cen-
trality of the craft workers’ ease with technology to their masculine
identity. The industrial strength of craftsmen derived from their
knowledge, and competence with machines. The control over this type
of industrial technology has traditionally been the province of men,
and women workers have been excluded from these technical skills.
The technical change from linotype to electronic photocomposition,

   
  
  
  
    
  
   
  
   
  
    
   
   
   
  
   
    
   
   

The Technology of Production 39

oweyer, literally makes the compositors feel emasculated. Because
i ‘ ork of composing now resembles typing and involves working
. ,_-,paper instead of metal, that is, a shift from factory work to the
«ice, the compositors no longer consider it to be real work. Tradi-
n-al craft culture was associated with hot metal, dirt and physxcal
tit and the elimination of this not only diminishes their control over
heir-work but it also represents a threat to their masculinity.

Qlearly, however, the appropriation of technical skills plays an
important part in the reproduction of inequality among men as well

evthat all women have an identical relationship to machinery and
technical knowledge. There are obviously important differences
ween the technical skills of say women factory workers and those
technically trained professional, women. However, Cockburn
ad that what they had in common was that they were both to be
ound operating machinery, but rarely in those occupations that
olve knowing what goes on inside the machine. ‘With few excep—
ons, the designer and developer of the new systems, the people who
arket and sell, install, manage and service machinery, are men.
men may push the buttons but they may not meddle With the
orks’ (1985, pp. 11-42). Women may well have consrderable know-
dgeabout the machine that they work on, but the key to power 15
eXible, transferable skills and these are still the property of men.

L 0 say that technical competence is part of male gender identity,
. at to presume that there is a coherent single form of masculinity.
he; masculine culture of technology may take a partially different
:rm-for working-class and middle—class men. The cult of masculinity
"olving around physical prowess is closely associated With shop-
oOr culture among manual workers. Working—class men may be
ore able [when it comes to fixing cars and domestic machines, but
iddle—class men have more power through their possession of
Street and generalizable technical knowledge. Furthermore, it needs
he stressed that ethnic and generational differences, as well as class
ivisions, produce different versions of masculinity. If we are to avord

