22 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

the resources necessary for invention. Experience of existing techno-
logy isia precondition for the invention of new technology. '

The nature of women’s inventions, like that of men’s, is ‘azfunction
ofﬁtime,’ *VVplace Vand'resources. Segregated at work and primarily con-
finedeto the private Sphereof'the household, women’s experience has
_ beenvseverely restricted! and therefore so too-hasfitheir'inventiVeness.

Anéinteresting illustrationrof thispoint- lies in the‘fact that women who,

wﬂeeniployed in themunitionsfactories duringthe First World War
are «' 3011‘ “record as , having: redesigned“- the: - Weaponry , they ' were
‘making'. 1‘ Thus, given the‘opportunity, women“ haVe’demonstrated
their inventive capacity in what now seems the most unlikely of
contexts. - ~

Missing: The Gender Dimension in the Sociology of
Technology ' V

Thefhistorical approach is an advance over essentialist positions which
seek to base a new technology on women’s innate values. Women’s
profound alienation from technology is accounted for 1n terms of the
his‘t’o {al and cultural construction of technology as masculine. I
believe that women ’5 exclusion from, and rejection of, technology 15
made more explicahle by an analysis of technology as a culture that
expresses and consohdates relations amongst men} If technical corn-
petenc’e is an integral part of masculine gender identity, why should
women be expected to aspire to it? ~ - V -
Such an account of technology and gender relations, however, is
still at a: general levelﬂs: There are few cases where feminists have
really got inside the‘itblackfbox’ of technology to do-deta’iled empirical
research, as ’somefof the most recent» sociological literature has
attempted. Over the: lastfew years, a newé‘sodology?ofit‘echnology has
emerged ‘rwhich is studying: theinvention,’ development, “stabilization
and diffusion of? specific 'artefacts.” It is‘evident "from this research
that technology is not simplythe’product of rationalitechniCal impera-
tives Rather, political choices are embedded 1n the very design and
selection of technology , ,,

. Technologies result from aseries of specificdecisions made by par—
ticular groups-of people in particular places atparticular times for
their own purposes. As such, technologies bear the imprint or the
people and social‘context in which they-ideVeloped.’ David Noble
.(1984, p. xiii) expresses this point succinctly as followsr‘Becauseof
11s very concreteness, people tend to confront technology as ‘an

  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology 23

reducible brute fact, a given, a first cause, rather than as hardened
' tory, frozen fragments of human and social endeavor. Techno-
gical change 1s a process subject to struggles for control by different
oops. As such the outcomes depend primarily on the distribution
power and resources within society.

VVThere is now an extensive literature on the history of technology
-,d the economics of technological innovation. Labour historians and
cciologists have investigated the relationship between social change
“dithe shaping of production processes in great detail and have also
' e? , concerned with the influence of technological form upon social
elations. The sociological approach has moved away from studying
individual inventor and from the notion that technological innova-
onis a result of some inner technical logic. Rather, it attempts to

hnology is thus the function of a complex set of technical, social,
cenomic, and political factors. An artefact may be looked on as the
ongealed outcome of a set of negotiations, compromises, conflicts,
ntroversies and deals that were put together between opponents in
ooms filled with smoke, lathes or computer terminals’ (Law, 1987,
496) , _
Because social groups have different interests and resources, the
eveloprnent: process brings out conflicts between different views of

the technical requirements of the device. Accordingly, the stability
and form: of artefacts depends on the capacity and resources that the

salient soCial groups can mobilize in the course of the deveIOpment

Eprocess. Thus 1n the technology of production, economic and social
class interests often lie behind the development and adoption of

evices. In the case of military technology, the operation of bureau—
ratio and organizationalinterests of state decision- making will be

:tdentifiab‘le Growing attention is now being given to the extent to

Which the state sponsorship of military technology shapes civilian

technology _

So far; however, little attention has been paid to the way in which
technological objects may be shaped by the operation of gender
interests. This blindness to gender issues is also indicative of a general
problem with the methodology adopted by the new sociology of
technology Using a conventional notion of technology, these writers

