  
 
 
  
    
   
  
  
  
    
   
   
  
   
   
  
   
    
   
   
  
   
  
  
   
 
   
   
 
  
 
    
  
  
   
   
   
    
    
   
   
   

156 Technology as Masculine Culture Technology as Masculine Culture l57

' men and girls do have a facility with programming, the categories
valuating their performance are themselves gender-biased. They
esignated as getting the right-results by the wrong method. Only
mastery is identified as the rational, logical approach. However
'uneasymhen- Turkle argues that male ‘planners’ versus female
kerers’ represent basic cognitive styles that are grounded in
Sychological sex differences. Here she is inﬂuenced by the work of
lynFox Keller (1983, 1985), Nancy Chodorow (1978) and perhaps
estaby Carol Gilligan (1982). In different ways these authors all pose
essential theory of sexual difference in cognitive skills.
. ,it-he extent that this signals ‘the return to conventional ideas of
damental and comprehensive cognitive, emotional and moral dif-
nce between women and men’ (Segal, 1987, p. 146) I am uncon—
ced. Firstly, on purely empirical grounds I am sceptical about the
once, provided for the? existence of sex differences in cognitive
,es. For example, Martin Hughes et al. (1988) found no such differ-
ences. Previous research on sex differences with regard to mathe-
tical ability has always stressed the lack of confidence and the
,nformity of girls and the resulting tendency for them to follow the
yes; diligently. This would lead one to suppose that girls would be
hard masters in computing. Are we now to believe that in compu-
gz boys follow the rulesandagirls are practising an alternative style?
ore generally the search for ‘significant’ sex differences in this or
at behaviour has a doubtful political:gpedigree and it is difficult to
bid the conclusion that such reSearch finds what it has set out to
d. Although studies do find evidence of differences between the
xes, the variation within the sexes is more important than the
:fferences between them.20 Secondly, and more fundamentally, it is
creasingly clear that cognition cannot be stripped of its social con—
tent to revealpure logical reasoning.
Over the last ten years or so developmental psychology has recog—
ntzed that the development of children cannot be understood outside
the social context in which it occurs.21 Social relationships, under-
andings and practices play a constitutive role in the elaboration of
the child’s conceptual knowledge. To present differences in program-
mingstyle as differences of individual psychology, as Turkle does, is
to assume, an individualized account of learning (Linn, 1985, p. 95).
Learning is a collective, social process. Turkle’s predominantly
psychological rather than sociological framework leads her to neglect
the historical. and cultural context in which computing education
‘ takes place. The pattern of boys being more independent and strategy-
oriented, and girls being more concrete and dependent, bears a

competitive. Females are described as only interested in compute I
tools for use and application, as ‘soft masters’, as more concrete
cooperative in orientation.‘8 Thus it is argued that girls are ice
to achieve, not simply as the result of biological differen
because of essential psychological differences. These argument
reminiscent of two views thatare by now somewhat discredit V
is the old sexual stereotype about women being too exact
irrational and illogical, not to mention lacking. the visuai-
awareness, to be good at mathematics: the other is the l960san
belief that workingclassand black children were naturally suit
less abstract or more concrete forms of learning. The new
fundamentally feminist twist in the argument, as we shall see;
difference is no longer equated with inferiority or hierarc
ordering. -
By far the best exposition of this view, and one which isdraw
widely by other authors, is to be found in the work of Sherry'T
(1984, also Turkle and Papert, forthcorning).’9 From her ob
tions of young children programming at school, Turkic found
boys and girls tended to use two distinctive styles of computing,
she calls ‘hard’ and ‘soft’ mastery. Hard masters are overwhelm
boys, imposing their will over the machine by implementin
structured, linear plan. The goal is to control the machine. Girls
to be soft masters, having a' more ‘interactive’, ‘negotiatin
‘relational’ style. They relate to the computer’s formal syste
language for communication rather than as a set of rigid rules. Tu
draws a parallel with Claude LévhStrauss’ distinction between
ern science and the science of preliterate societies in terms- of
contrast between planning and bricolage or tinkering. ‘The former
the science of the abstract, the latter is a science of the concrete:
the bricoleur, the soft master works with a set of concrete elemen
While the hard master thinks in terms of global abstractions, the _.
master works on a problem by arranging and rearranging the
elements, working through new combinations.’ (Turkic, 1984, p. in
Turkic is clear and emphatic that neither of these styles is superior
programming - they are different, and diversity or ‘epistemologi'
pluralism’ should be celebrated. The problem for womenthen is»E
differential value accorded to the different styles. Computer expert“ ,
is deﬁned as hard mastery; it is recognized as, the only correct w "
to programme. Soft mastery is culturally constructed as inferior. on
more women are not up to hard male mastery.
Turkic is correct to point out that when gendered styles of co: _
puting are identified by teachers, they are valued accordingly. When , ,_

 

 

