 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  

132 The Built Environment The Built Environment 133

curb. Even those who notice this would not be inclined to attach any
peciialmeaning to it - we seldom give things like roads and bridges
, 11y consideration. a

n fact, the two hundred low-hanging overpasses on Long Island
ere deliberately designed to achieve a particular social goal. Robert
oses, the‘rmaster builder of roads, parks, bridges and other public
forks, from the 19209 to the 19705 in New York, had these overpasses
uilt to speciﬁcations that would discourage the presence of buses on
,‘s parkways. The reasons reﬂect Moses’s class :bias and racial pre—
ice. Affluent whites would be free to use their cars on the parkways
or recreation and commuting. Poorpeople and blacks, who normally
usedgpublic transport, were kept off the roads because the twelve~foot
ghibuses couldnot get through the overpasses. One consequence was
0 limit- access of racial minorities and lowaincome groups to Jones
Beach, Moses’ s acclaimed public park Although Winner does not
ntion women, women sdependence on public transport means that

innocuous technological forms such as roads and bridges embody and
emforce power relations. What 1s so significant about these vast tech-
ologicalprojects is that they‘endure, such that for generations after
Moseshas gone, the highways and ‘rbridges he built to favour the use
121 thesautomobile: over thei‘i'development of mass transit continue to
give New York much of its 'present‘form. ‘Many of his monumental
tructures of concrete and steel embody a systematic social inequality,
way-of engineering relationships among people that, after a time,
omesjust another part of the landscape’ (Winner, 1980, p. 124).

he Car Culture

t as bridges may not be as innocent of political qualities as they
try“ appear, so too cars have been shaped by a plethora of social and
onomiclfactors. Above I stressed that the dominance of the car was
no simply about the efficient movement of people around cities but
as ensured by economic forces. Means of travelling- whether by
car, motorcycle or bicycle are also consumer products charged with
ymbolic as well as economic and pragmatic meaning. The car is one
o the central cultural commodities of the twentieth century: precisely
because it is such a mass, commonplace technology, we often fail to
appreciate its ideological significance. It' 1s not simply technical effi-
’ ciency that determines the design of cars but cultural forces that shape
them.

5.3 Urban planners ignore the needs of the least mobile

Source. Production stills from the film Serious Undertakings (1982) directed ’
by Helen Grace. Photographs by Sandy Edwards

