     
   
   
    
  
 
   
 
  
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
    
 
  
   
   
   
    
   
  
  
   
  
   
    
  
   

84 Domestic Technology Domestic Technology 85

In charting the historical development of the last four household
tems, water, gas, electricity, and petroleum, Cowan reveals further
V iencies in the ‘production to consumption’ﬁnodel. These techno-
al changes totally reorganized housework yet their impact was
iguous. On the one hand they radically increased the productivity
ousewives: ‘modern technology enabled the American housewife
950 to produce singlehandedly what her counterpart of 1850
ed a staff of three or four to produce; a middle-class standard
ealth and cleanliness’ (1983, p. 100). On the other hand, while
_ hating much drudgery, modern labour-saving devices did not
‘ cc the necessity for time-consuming labour (see figure 4.1). Thus
is no simple cause and effect relation between the mechanization
omes and changes in the volume and nature of household work.
deed the disappearance of paid and unpaid servants (unmarried
nghters, maiden aunts; grand rents and children fall into the latter
' ‘ and the imposition of the entire job
‘e houSewife herself, was arguably the most significant change.
e propertion of servants to households in America dropped from
ervant to every 15 households in 1900, down to 1 to 42 in 1950
,ﬁwan, 1983, p.99). Most of this shrinkage took place during the
Os. The disappearance of domestic servants stimulated the
echanization of homes, whichﬁfinturn may have hastened the dis-
piearance of servants (see ﬁgure 4.2).,
This change in the structure of the household labour force was
empanied by a remodelled ideology of housewifery. The develop
ht in the early years of this century of the domestic science
vement, the germ theory of disease and the idea of ‘scientific
therhood’, led to new exacting standards of housework and
*dcare} As standards of personal and household cleanliness rose
ring the twentieth century women were expected to produce clean
ets, bathtubs and sinks. With the introduction of washing
chines, laundering increased because of higher expectations of
anliness. There was a major change in the importance attached to
grid rearing and mother’s role. The average housewife had fewer
hildren, but modern ‘child-centred’ approaches to parenting involved
I :«in spending much more time and effort. These trends were
itploited and further promoted by advertisers in their drive to expand
he market for domestic appliances.
‘Housework began to be represented as an expression of the
ousewife’s affection for her family. The split between publicgarid:
rivate meant that the home was expected to provide a, havenfrorn; ,
e alienated, stressful technological order of the workplace ands/as

although domestic technology did raise the productivity of hous
work, it was accompanied by rising expectations of the housew1
role which generated more domestic work for women. Fin,
mechanization has only had a limited effect on housework beca
it has taken place within the context of the privatized, single«fanu
household. " '

It is important to distinguish between different phases of ind“
trialization that involved different technologies. Cowan characterizes
twentieth—century technology as consisting of eight interlock V
systems: food, clothing, health care, transportation, water, gas, e
tricity, and petroleum products. While some technological systems
fit the model of a shift from production to consumption, others
not.

Food, clothing, and health care systems do fit the ‘production t
consumption’ model. By the beginning of the twentieth century,
purchasing of processed foods and ready—made clothes instead: a
home production was becoming common. Somewhat later, the heal
care system moved out of the household and into centralized instit’it
tions. These trends, continued with increasing momentum during ‘th
ﬁrst half of this century.

The transportation system and its relation to changing consumptio‘
patterns, however, exemplifies the shift in the other direction. Dunn
the nineteenth century, household goods were often delivered, maii
order catalogues were widespread and most people-did not spe
much timebuying goods. With the advent of the motor car after;
First World War, all this began to change. By 1930the automoh
had become the: prime mode of transportation in the UnitedStates
Delivery services of all kinds began to disappear and the burden
providing transportation shifted from the seller to the buyer (Strasser:
1982). Meanwhile women gradually replaced men as the drivers a
transport, more and more business converted to the ‘self-service’ con
cept, and households became increasingly dependent upon house
wives to provide the service. The time spent on shepping tasks
expanded until today the average time spent is eight hours per week
the equivalent of an entire working day.

In this way, households moved from the net censumption to the ne
production of transportation services, and housewives became th
transporters of purchased goods rather than the receivers of the
The purchasing of goods provides a classic example of a task that
generally either ignored altogether or considered as ‘not work’, in spite
of the time, energy and skill required, and its essential role in the
national economy.

    

