l2 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

themselves be seen as historically specific social products and that we
should engage in social practices to redefine them. Her essay expresses
well the spurious dilemma facing those feminists who feel forced to
choose between scientific rationality or feminine intuition.6 Further-
more, it is important to stress that the basis of men’s power is not
simply a product of the ideas we hold and the language we use, but
of all the social practices that give men authority over women. Ideas
are mediations of social relations and to transform them we need to
transform the fundamental character of scientific institutions in
contemporary society and the forms of political power that science
bestows on specific social groups.

It may be that the search for the most appropriate feminist
epistemology, however philosophically sophisticated (as Harding
indeed is), is misdirected. The more philosophically oriented feminist
work on science suffers from the problem of dealing with ideas
divorced from social practices. Indeed, as amply shown by these
authors, statements of ‘The Scientific Method’ do typically contain
male visions of what it is to know and what the world is really like.
Scientific practice is in no sense determined by statements of method.
The latter are better seen as political pronouncements, as legitima—
tions, rather than as descriptions of what scientists actually do. They
serve to say something about the place of science in the wider society,
or to bolster a more scientific speciality or discipline against its com-
petitors (Richards and Schuster, 1989).7

It is in this light that we should see attempts to spell out a speci—
fically feminist scientific method. They are politically useful in that
they turn the feminist spotlight on the content of scientific knowledge
instead of simply highlighting questions of recruitment to science. We
need to be cautious in presuming that the adoption of a ‘feminist’
scientific method would lead to differences in scientific practice with-
out a thoroughgoing change in the relations of power within science.
The danger is that what might parade as feminist science would simply
amount to the same scientific practice by another name.

From Science to Technology

While there has been a growing interest in the relationship of science
to society over the last decade, there has been an even greater preoc-
cupation with the relationship between technology and social change.
Debate has raged over whether the ‘white heat of technology’ is
radically transforming society and delivering us into a post-industrial

  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology l3

age. A major concern of feminists has been the impact of new tech—
elegy on women’s lives, particularly on women’s work. The intro—
ion of word processors into the office provided the focus for
“ch early research. The recognition that housework was also work,
it unpaid, led to studies on how the increasing use of domestic
nology in the home affected the time spent on housework. The
ploitation of Third World women as a source of cheap labour for
themanufacture of computer components has also been scrutinized.

ost recently there has been a vigorous debate over developments in
productive technology and the implications for women’s control
8 er their fertility.

. , Throughout these debates there has been a tension between the view
at technology would liberate women - from unwanted pregnancy,
from housework and from routine paid work ~ and the obverse view
at most new technologiesare destructive and oppressive to women.
For example, in the early sexéenties, Shulamith Firestone (1970)
laborated the view that developments 1n birth technology held the key

 

tological motherhood. Nowadays there IS much more concern with
, the negative implications of the new technologies, ironically most

clearly reflected in the highly charged debate over the new reproduc—
_ tive technologies.

A key issue here is whether the problem lies in men’s domination
of technology, or whether the technology is in some sense inherently
patriarchal. If women were in control, would they apply technology
to more benign ends? In the following discussion on gender and tech—
nology, I will explore these and related questions.

An initial difficulty in considering the feminist commentary on
technology arises from its failure to distinguish between science and
technology. Feminist writing on science has often construed science
purely as a form of knowledge, and this assumption has been carried
over into much of the feminist writing on technology. However just
as science includes practices and institutions, as well as knowledge,
so too does technology. Indeed, it is even more clearly the case with
technology because technology is primarily about the creation of
artefacts. This points to the need for a different theoretical approach
to the analysis of the gender relations of technology, from that being
developed around science.

Perhaps this conflation of technology with science is not surprising
given that the sociology of scientific knowledge over the last ten years
has contested the idea of a non—controversial distinction between
science and technology. John Staudenmaier (1985, pp. 83-120)

