   
   
  
   
 
  
    
   
 
  
 
   
  
   
    
  
 
  
    
  

130 The Built Environment The Built Environment 131

communication. By emphasizing the critical connection betwee
women’s domestic roles and considerations of time and space
time—geographic perspective adds a further dimension to our anal
of women’s inequality. It has shown that the travel patterns of the
sexes are quite different and that, in response to domestic resp‘
bilities, women elect to restrictfthe time spent on the journey toé
Given that family location is traditionally determined-by» its $35-
relationship to the man’s »-employment, women’s opportunities
particularly restricted. . _
This is best illustrated by tracing the day-today activities of:‘
a single parent. ‘Jane cannot leave home for work before atcer
hour of the day because of her child’s dependence on her for-fe
and other needs, and because the soleaccessible nursery is as:
open. Jane has no car and ,henceis faced with severe capabiiit “
coupling constraints in reaching the two fstation’s’, of the nurse
her place of work. Her choice of jobs is" restricted by these constrat
and reciprocally the fact that‘é'she has little, chance of acquiri
holding down azwelle-paid occupation reinforces the other constr
she faces in the trajectory: of her path through, theda’y. 'Shc‘éhtts
collect her child‘in mid-afternoon, before‘the nursery closes, an
thus effectively restricted to part-timeemployment. Suppdse ishe
a choice of two, jobs, one betterspaid and offering the chance-to
a car, making it possible for her to take her child to a-nursery fur:
awayfrorn her-home. On takingthe more-remunerative jobs/she“ '
that the {time expended in driving to the nursory, to and from w
and then'back home again does not allow” her time to do otherznece
sary tasks; such as shopping.» cooking and housework. She
therefore feel herself ‘forced’ to-leave the job for a low-paid. part-tr ;

the journey can be accomplished by public transport it requires a
timber of changes and is therefore very time consuming and
nsive. This is a major reason why the job market for women is
h more geographically restricted than that for men.

urtherrnore, more women than men travel with grocery bags, baby
iag’es and dependants. Waiting at bus stops, climbing up and
n bus steps or worse still underground stairsis a nightmare for
one who isn’t young, able bodied and'runencumbered (see figure
; The dominance of {the car has ‘étlsb‘limade the city, an alienating
ronrnent for women and pedeStrians. To get under motorways
divide cities requires," passing throughoften dark, dingy under-
eund passages where againi‘there' are often many steps to negotiate.
ban motorwaysgand rural trunk roads cut through women’s lives,
»‘ng a noisy; polluting, dangerouscwedge between their homes and
' kplaces, Schools an alth centres, causing them to walk round-
ut rentes'ithrough hostile rays-pr overgwindybridges, divert-
i‘ ening usjourn ysrand :creating'unsafe, no—go areas
"tank Wallsand- erelict spaces’=-’(Women and Transport Forum,

a 8. p. 12115

 
   
 

    

     
 
 
   
   
   
   
    
 
 
   
 
 
     
   
 
 
  

  

on women and transport discovered
adeninever go out alone after dark,
, per cent. Of these who do travel
‘ 'ght, blac V _ , _ , "omen feel less safe than do white
they: have thel'addi ion fearof racist attack. As public
ecornes:xmoreg:aut0mated, there are fewer staff on trains,
platf " rms so womenfeel even more at risk. Interestingly
tn, tear dominated cities are‘themost dangerous. Detroit has one
pew”capitamurderfratesof any city in the West. In cities

ese ar areiusediasfm‘nch‘for‘protection as for transportation.
emphasizing‘the way in which the organization of the
' ”item compounds women’s-inequality, virtually lock—

 
 

 

tran‘sport facilitiestin ,conStrain-ing Women’s access to employmen

~ .

serv ces and social life. In particular. Whether women are emplo

partétime, fullwtime or :at all is to a significant extent contingent e" , ,orld‘tof very ilimite‘cl‘physical Space, and exacerbates
these spatial relations. Firstly, an increasing number of women we; unequ allegation'cfrresnurcesgwnhin the Clty. Iferhaps the most
pattetime and'therefOre travel more in off~peak periods when service 1' ' ten of the < way ‘Ireliance on public transport can

  
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
   

arefmore erratic. Yet public transport is still overWhelminglydesigne
around, the needs of full—time «* workers commuting to the centr‘
buSinessVdiStrict. Secondly,as Jane’s story demonstrates; wome ,
journeys have been shown to be more Complex or multi»purposetha
men’si‘as'a result of theirrelesas mot-hers; unpaid domestic worker
and paid workers. Thisrneans that they do many more journeysor
shorter duration thanmen and these journeys are across the city. Eve-n,»

- » ”"DozArtifacts Have Politics?’ by Langdon Winner
980). Winner tells us that anyone who has travelled the highways
of>s_America and has become used to the normal height of overpasses
may well find something a little odd about some of the bridges over
"e, parkways on Long lSland, New YOrk. Many of the overpasses are
traordinarily low, having as little as nine feet of clearance at the

