 
   
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
   
 
   
  
   
   
    
  
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
  
  
   
    
      
   
  
    
  
   

”2 Technology as Masculine Culture Technology as Masculine Culture M3

refuge from, the much more uncertain and complex relationshi
characterize social life. According to Turkic, these young in
anrintensc need to master things; their addiction is not to c _
programming but to playing with the issue of control. It
exerting power and domination within the unambiguousmo hi
machinery. ,. ‘ ,

Perhaps the ultimate illustration of men pitting themselves,
machines is the story of the Air Force test pilots who became the
astronauts. What is absorbing about Tom Wolfe’s account,
Right Stuff (1980) is its focus on the psychology of the test pi
ﬂying aircraft higher and faster than they were designedto-b '
these men were constantly testing the limits of the physically 1pc
pushing ‘the outer edge, of «the envelope? until the limits of th
nology were reached and only having ‘the rightstuff’ could:
man’s life. This is the stuff that lets you function as a superh‘
when you havepushed, yourself beyond the edge of human‘an
nical possibility, the stuff that allows you to feel ‘in control in
tionsthat were set up in advance assituations where controlw
be _.lost.,And when/they leftgthe airfield these test pilots wool
the outer;:edge insthe male rituals of drinking and driving the, ,
atspeeds almost out of control. The chancesof dying were asto
inglyahigh and yet these men actually wererdelighted to take 0 '
odds and prove. their courage.

One ofr-the interesting twists to the story is the contrast betwee
description of Chuck Yeager, who was the first man to fly mm
the sound barrier and the trips'of the first: astronauts. Whereas Yeag’
ranked foremost, among the true brothers of the right stuff
astronaut was seen not as a pilot but a passive occupant of a rock,
shown by the fact that the first ﬂight in a Mercury rocket was inwf
takenwby a chimpanzee. Wolfe tells of an incident: when the se
astronauts insisted that a window bedesigned into the capsule whi
they could open themselves. They even demanded manual controls;
the rocket so that they would have control and function ’morelih
pilots. In this sense, the commonly-drawn analogy between rocke
andmissile and the phallus, is somewhat inappropriate. For allxtha
the first astronauts were hailed as conquering heroes, accordingt
their own codes of masculinity they had actually become subordinat
to elaborate computerized controls, and were denied the scope
demonstrate their manliness. Real men fly planes, they don’t just pus
buttons!

I ugh the above descriptions are all of relatively powerful groups

en developing or controlling key forms of technology, they

i lyinvolve a wide variety of workplace cultures and practices.

this pointsto is the need to distinguish between different forms
masculinity in relation to different areas of technology. To say that
3 olsover technology is a coreelement of masculinity is not to imply
there is one masculinity or one technology. There are diverse
ural expressions of masculinity just as there are diverse techno-
‘es. Masculinity, like femininity, takes historically and culturally
i" fic forms; One need not presume that there is a single uniform
aviour pattern in all men to argue that the culture of technology
masculine. These disparate versions of masculinity reﬂect class
isions, as well as ethnicand generational differences.

:helstudy :of the social construction of masculinity has become a
ong :theme in the sociology of gender. A major contributor in this
ea; Bob Connell (1985, 1987), distinguishes between theculturally
'tminant forms of masculinity or ‘hegemonic mascuhmty’ and
bordinated’ or: ‘marginalized’ forms. By ‘hegemonic’ he means a
ocial ascendancy achievedvniot by force but bytthe organization of
I vate life and cultural processes. It is the dominant cultural ideal
masculinity, which need notwcorrespond closely with the actual
rsonalitiesof the vast majority of men. Although Connell uses the
em. ‘hegemonic masculinity’ in the singular, I read him to suggest
1 at there is a core of dominant masculinity which is reflectedastn
'fferent‘ variants. In contemporary ‘Western society, hegemo
asculinity is strongly associated with aggressiveness and theca
or, violence. . - ~

i: Of particular interest here is the extent to whichecontr .
ology is involved in. this archetype of hegemonic :mascuh
ult of masculinity which is based, on phystcalrggt ug
mechanical skills is particularly strong in thegshopy
working~class«men. Allithc things that are assocrat
I about and machinery - dirt, noise, dange j
rnasculinequalities.2 Machine-related :skillsza‘nd
fundamental measures of masculine status an
to this model of hegemonic masculinity; B
theshop-floor is one form of thedomin

is not the only important one and in shone ,
to consider the ideologies and practices-ho

 

 

 

   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

