18 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

has there been a call for a technology based on women’s values. In
Joan Rothschild’s (1983) preface to a collection on feminist perspec»
tives on technology, she says that: ‘Feminist analysis has sought to
show how the subjective, intuitive, and irrational can and do play a
key role in our science and technology’. Interestingly, she cites an
important male figure in the field, Lewis Mumford, to support her
case. Mumford’s linking of subjective impulses, life-generating forces
and a female principle is consistent with such a feminist analysis, as
is his endorsement of a more holistic view of culture and technological
developments.

Other male authors have also advocated a technology based on
women’s values. Mike Cooley is a well-known critic of the current
design of technological systems and he has done much to popularize
the idea of humanvcentred technologies. In Architect or Bee? (1980,
p. 43) he argues that technological change has ‘male values’ built into
it: ‘the values of the White Male Warrior, admired for his strength
and speed in eliminating the weak, conquering competitors and ruling
over vast armies of men who obey his every instruction . . . Techno-
logical change is starved of the so—called female values such as
intuition, subjectivity, tenacity and compassion’. Cooley sees it as
imperative that more women become involved in science and
technology to challenge and counteract the built—in male values: that
we cease placing the objective above the subjective, the rational above
the tacit, and the digital above analogical representation. In The
Culture of Technology, Arnold Pacey (1983) devotes an entire chapter
to ‘Women and Wider Values’. He outlines three contrasting sets of
values involved in the practice of technology — firstly, those stressing
virtuosity, secondly, economic values and thirdly, user or need-
oriented values. Women exemplify this third ‘responsible’ orientation,
according to Pacey, as they work with nature in contrast to the male
interest in construction and the conquest of nature.

Ironically the approach of these male authors is in some respects
rather similar to the coo-feminism that became popular amongst
feminists in the eighties. This marriage of ecology and feminism rests
on the ‘female principle’, the notion that women are closer to nature
than men and that the technologies men have created are based on
the domination of nature in the same way that they seek to dominate
women. Eco-feminists concentrated on military technology and the
ecological effects of other modern technologies. According to them,
these technologies are products of a patriarchal culture that ‘speaks
violence at every level’ (Rothschild, 1983, p. 126). An early slogan of
the feminist anti-militarist movement, ‘Take the Toys from the Boys’,

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology 19

[drew attention to the phallic symbolism in the shape of missiles.
owever, an inevitable corollary of this stance seemed to be the
epresentation of women as inherently nurturing and pacifist. The
oblems with this position have been outlined above in relation to
"ence based on women’s essential values. We need to ask how women
became associated with these values. The answer involves examining
e way in which the traditional division of labour between women
d men has generally restricted women to a narrow range of
perience concerned primarily with the private world of the home
d family.

, evertheless, the strength of these arguments is that they go beyond
the usual conception of the problem as being women’s exclusion from
processes of innovation and from the acquisition of technical
skills. Feminists have pointed to all sorts of barriers - in social atti-
“des, girls’ education and the employment policies of firms - to
account for the imbalance‘inishérnumber of women in engineering.
But rarely has the problem been identified as the way engineering has
been conceived and taught. In particular, the failure of liberal and
equal opportunity policies has led authors such as Cynthia Cockburn
985) to ask whether women actively resist entering technology. Why
have the women’s training initiatives designed to break men’s mono-
poly of the building trades, engineering and information technology
not been more successful? Although schemes to channel women into
technical trades have been small~scale, it is hard to escape the
conclusion that women’s response has been tentative and perhaps
ambivalent.

. I share Cockburn’s view that this reluctance ‘to enter’ is to do with
' thesex-stereotyped definition of technology as an activity appropriate
for men. As with science, the very language of technology, its sym—
V holism, is masculine. It is not simply a question of acquiring skills,

   
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
 
  

 

fore, to enter this world, to learn its language, women have first to
‘- forsake their femininity.

K "Technology and the Division of Labour

I will now turn to a more historical and sociological approach to the
analysis of gender and technology. This approach has built on some
theoretical foundations provided by contributors to the labour

