The Technology of Production 53

 
   
 
    
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
     
   
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

52 The Technology of Production

predecessors. These features made them seem more accessible to women
with skills and experience in operating ofﬁce equipment (pink techno-
; logy) as opposed to computers (blue technology).
See Crompton and Jones (1984).
Game and Pringle (1983) and Cockburn (1985) both present case studies
of employment where technical developments have substantially altered
* the skill and task range of jobs and yet the distinctions between ‘men’s’
i work and ‘women’s’ remain, with men still monopolizing the technical
_ jobs. See Purcell (1988) for a review of recent British research on the
” gendering of occupations.
« , See Wajcman and Probert (1988) for a report of our Australian study
on inew technology homework, which includes a general literature

their own use and in their own interests. It is more complex than that ,
Capital’s interest cannot be supposed always to coincide with that 0
men as a sex. As we have seen, some technologies are designed fo
use by women in order to break the craft control of men. Thus gende
divisions are commonly exploited in the power struggles ,betwee
capital and labour: In this way, the social relations that shape tech
nology include those of gender as well as class.

the pre—existing relations of sex, class and race that structure th
labour force and employment opportunities. Although there has bee _
an expansion of job opportunities for women in some of the net "
information services, ‘women’s jobs’ and ‘men’s jobs’ are as strongl
demarcated as ever. This is in part because social relations :ar
eXpressed in and shape technologies. The pace and direction of tech.
nolOgical development reﬂect existing gender relations as much "
they affect the sexual division of labour.

(1985); especially see the "extractfsby Bruland and Lazonick.

$66 Elger’s (1987) review of several recent studies.

'r a useful discussion of the undervaluing of skills in the clothing
industry, see chapter 5 of O’Donnell (1984).

NOTES

1 For a critical review of this literature, see Pollert (1988) who argues that
what she calls the ‘left-reformist’ writing which advocates ‘flexible:
specialization’ as a panacea has a conceptual afﬁnity with management
literature on the ‘flexible firm’.

2 Liff (1988) and Webster (1989) argue along similar lines in their excellent
reviews of the literature on office automation. See also the major twoe
volume report commissioned by the American National Research
Council, edited by Hartmann et a1. (1986, 1987), which examines the
effects of technological change on both the quantity and quality (if
women’s employment, particularly in clerical work.

3 I do not want to rehearse the various arguments contained in this
literature, as several comprehensive reviews already exist. See Thompson,
(1983) for an excellent introduction to debates on the labour process.

4 To anticipate my argument about the gendered design of technology,
Juliet Webster has pointed out to me that the first word processing
systems were deliberately restricted to stand-alone, dedicated micro?
computers rather than being developed in package form to be used on
mainframes or all-purpose micros. This particualr design was aimed‘at
the main users, women office workers who had formerly worked with
typewriters. Word processing machines were given dedicated keyboards
with text editing functions embedded in the hardware, and screens which
imitated pieces of paper, to make them resemble their mechanical

