  
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
 
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  

144 Tech l '
no ogy as Masculine Culture Technology as Masculine Culture l45

adept with cars, does not convey the same status or agency.
_ er in fact does hegemonic masculinity, which is more strongly
' eased: by working—class than ruling—clasemen. The exaggerated
j culinity- found amongst working-class cultures must be viewed
ainstthe background of their relative deprivation, their low status
, their comparative powerlessness in the broader society. The point
eis' that although technical expertise is a key source of power
ongstmen. it does not override other sources of power, such as
sition in the class structure.
There is one final but crucial point to be made about these
culine culturesof technology, which is that the ideology of mascu—
W is remarkably flexiblef A good illustration of this point is
vided by engineering. Of all the major professions, engineering
tains the smallest proportion of females and projects a heavily
sculine image hostile**:to women.6 Engineering is a particularly
signing example of an arch‘étypically masculine culture because it
at across the boundaries between physical and intellectual work and
«maintains strong elements of mind/body dualism.
Central to the social construction of the engineer is the polarity
j tween science-and sensuality, the hard and the soft, things and
eople. This social construction draws on the wider system of symbols
, d metaphors which identifygwomen with nature and men with
culture. Sexual ideologies and stereotypes are diverse and fluid, but
ach opposites as ‘male/female’ and ‘reason/emotion’ are central to
‘ estemsculture. The notion that women are closer to nature than men
ntains various elements such as that women are more emotional,
ess analytical andweaker than men, In the advancedindustrial world,
here scientiﬁc and technical rationality are highly valued, these
'sdciatidns- play apowerful role in the ideological constructionsof _
omensas inferior} Like Turkle, Sally Hacker (1981) foundrih '
ngineers attributed values in the social hierarchy on a continuum
'ving most prestigeto scientific abstraction and technical coin
and least to feminine properties of nurturance, sensualit
iody. Engineering-seems to be the very epitome of cool ,
antithesis of feeling. Yet, as Hacker (1989) remarks " .
, ready seen, ‘technics can be exhilarating, :éa: '
leasure, even arousal, at the'core of intravatio‘
Pleasures of Engineering,» Samuel Florman (:19.
and physical, as well as intellectual, pleasures e
engineering. ‘ ' “
z e Machines can clearly evoke powerfuiiemoti
for men. One wonders if this is at least in partw

are central to the techniques of violence and are almost entirely
hands of men. _ »

activities in terms of the traditional ‘warrior ethic’ of heroi _
linity. The construction of'the heroic is usually around mat
combat and Violence betweenrnen. In fact, these mainly white;

on the culturally dominant form of masculinity for their non
risk, danger and virility to describe their work. An apparent: par
emerges however whenwe look morerclosely at these descriptions
hackers. Seen through the eyes of Turkic or 'Weizenbaumsthes’ H
technologists are pictured ’ as- unattractive and pathological;
young men of disheveled appearance. . . . Their rumpled-cl
their unwashed and unshaven faces, and their uncombedgvha
testify that they areoblivious to their bodies and to the world «in
they move.’ (Weizenbaum, 1976, p. 116) They are ‘losers’vandi‘lori
:whoserimmersionein the world of machines hascut them off;
otherpeople, and they rely on the hacker subculture for theirése
of identity. ,
The. question that this poses is whether for these men tech-iii
expertise is about the realization of power or their lack of it.3:-'
indifferent ways both things are true points to the complex relatio
ship between knowledge, power and technology. An obsession Wit
technology may well be an attempt by men who aresocial failures
compensate for their lack of power. On the other hand, mastery c
this technology does bestow some power on these men; in relation
other men and women who lack this expertise, in terms of the materi
rewards this skill brings, and even in terms of their popular portray
as ‘heroes’ at the frontiers of technological progress. By providin ' i
largely psychoanalytical account of hackers, Turkle’s notion of failur
is_very individualistic and does not address the wider cultural context
Within which hackers operate.“ In particular, there is little mention
of the extent torwhich race, class, and age matter in what countsrras"
failure for men. , "-‘
. In our culture, to be in command of the very latest technology
signifies being involved in directing the future and so it is a highly
valued and mythologized activity. The mastery of other kinds of
technology, such as that often found amongst working-class lads who

  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  

 

 

