 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
    
     

60 Re rod '
P ucttvs Technology Reproductive Technology 61
ed here is a relatively recent one and, as a result, it is charac—
by more sensitivity to ‘thepolitics of difference’ than some of
lierfeministliterature. There is now a much clearer realization
gender, ,thatrwhat it isto be a woman, is efperienced everywhere
‘ suchmediations as sexualorientation, age, race, class, his-
,colonialism. The recognition that new technologies may
ery:,,differentz implications :for Third World and First World
within and between countries, is a strength of much of the

women, another grou
re. : , ,

ambivalent effects marge-,ofoéemrmst ,commentators emphasize
’ (sh/ficheﬁgtlgfatjigﬁgogies have on the live eal dangers for women that accompany medicaland scientific
ovations is . d ‘ (‘ 987» 13-3). , , am; the, sphere of reproduction are directly related to the dif-
ina equate as many of them reﬁt? circumstances of women’s posnion in society. Access to the
ofexpensive techniques such as in—vitro fertilization is heavily
ed o thegability to pay. Women whoare poor and vulnerable will
H Ivegaccesstothesetechniques and, furthermore, they will be least
presist abuses of medtcalpowerand techniques. For example,
issuesoyer sexrspredeternfination have a special urgency given
ce that; the technique of amniocentesis is. currently being used
electgfemale lietuses :for abortion in India.- Sterilization and
$131135 Dope—Provera, aswellas hazardous experiments, have
7 particularly targeted at: coloured women.

w otentialuse of increasingly sophisticated forms of genetic
ingislikelytoinﬂuence,theideﬁnition of a ‘genetic defect’ and
are implications for the,.wa#y disability is seen in society.
search such as Wendy ,FarrantZs (1985) shows that the medical
agementofprenatal .screeningrin Britain, has taken the form of

ggWQmenls consentlfor termination as a condition for being
wedgthe; amniocentesis test. In this context, these techniques are
populationcontrol rather than about, enabling women to make
e informed choices, about reproduction. .
hereis broad agreement- among feminists about thesedangers. For
so feministsgwho dispute the VFINRRAGE analysis, these dangers
eennotgasaa function-ofzthe technologies themselves, but of their
so; This position is summed up byStanworth (1987, p. 15), when
, says thatthese technologies 'haveibeen ‘a deuble-edged sword. On
one hand, they have offered women a greater technical possibility
, ecide if, when and underwhat conditionsto have children; on the
her, the domination ofso much reproductive technology by the

,ical profession and the state has enabled others to have an even
eater; capacity to exert control ever women’s lives’. From this
rspective,,therefore,_ the: feministcritique of reproductive techno-
logies goes no further than demanding access to knowledge and

 
  
  
 
     
   
    
   
   
    
  
  
    
       
  
         
 
    
  
 
   
   
 
   
  
  
 
  
 
  

n terms of ’the costs and the benefits’. '

. , e that the» women’s: rnovem ,
ignored: the problems of infertility and treatedrwomenigltroflrfasrtizirga

earch programmes as ‘blindedtby science? an

mthese -higl1—techares
passive victims of?

_ , . . ‘ echnol
23:11.23; tthett; anthers: desrre to bear children. As a result ' feniiiii
go, esetec ologies hasatend “ L "t
rhetoriczgand' fantasies *iwith L 6110)! to; confuse masculm
, _ , actual: r, z ‘ ' I i
In??? «j:;women’~s;zzown res power relations,.«thereby ‘8!!!) ‘

 

    

‘rigllito? reproductive ‘choice’. I ’ ' ‘
techg-‘lgiﬁ‘f’up 9f. writers take issue with the radical feminist view, that ‘
Instead: : gig; 1: ;, tgfmselves, : have , patriarchal political properties ,
_ .,, t ,, ,r ro emati-zerme institutional “settin ' “ '
, m , . _ _ , , g: in which
2I:li::;l:;::1$lI,technical, procedures woccur. , Whereas, ,theA-.«FINRR::]§§ «
empowerare against these innovations because; - they, inevitably radis~
; ,, women, according toRosalind Pollack iPetchesky, ivyetneed ‘

to separate the. power relations within which reproductive techno-

logies. area ' , ' '
Similarly, pphed from the technologresthemselves’ (J 987 ,g p.79);

forMichelleStanworth- the ’ '
__ i . . , problem 18 not tech 1 _
drift/gimme technologies draw their meaning from the oilillguzgfud
p t chmatem which they are embedded’ (1987 p 26) n

T , . .
he feminist debate about the new reproductive technologies

