154 Technology as Masculine Culture Technology as Masculine Culture l55

    
  
 
    
 
   
   
   
  
    
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
    
  
   
  
    
  
    
  
  
   
  
  
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
  

girls. They are populated almost exclusively by males; the few females
in evidence are usually spectators Leslie Haddon has shown that it .
as the continuity from pinball machines that helped shape the arcade
game-playing world as a predominantly masculine one. Electronic
amcs directly appropriated the role of pinball and, within a few years
f: their introduction, pinball sales had declined by two-thirds. The
institutions that these young males had built up around pinball~ the
alues, rules, and rituals ~ were transferred to the video game ‘[T]he
ocation of video games within the arcade and certain other contexts
dmeant that the-new machines were incorporated into the existing
ocial activities of this milieu. Amusement parks, and many of the
ther public sites where coin-operation machines were found, were
art of street culture. They were mainly male, particularly young
ale, preserves.’” Thus the new technology was slotted into a pre—

xisting male subculturesand took on its masculine face.

they would use computers when they were 30 years old, ‘the boys sai
they would use them for finances, data processing, and games," t
girls thought they would use them for housework. Wrote one
grade girl. “When I am thirty, I’ll have a computer that has long:
and that can clean the house and cook meals, and another to pa
groceries and stuff.” ’ (Kolata, 1984, p.25) '

Games are the primary attraction of computers for children. Giv
that it is men (often computer hackers) who design video games
software, it is hardly surprising that their designs typically appe '
male fantasies In fact video games began at one of the places w

«computer culture itself got started. The first video game was .8
War, built at MIT in the early 19605.ls Many of the most- po
games today are simply programmed versions of traditionall n1
non-computer games, involving shooting, blowing up, speedin
lapping in some way or another. Theyvoften have militaristictr
such as ‘Destroy All Subs’ and ‘Space Wars’ highlightingztheirthem
of adventure and violence. No wonder then that these games of
frustrate or bore the non—macho players exposed to them. As a resu
macho: males often-have a positive first experience with the compo,
other‘males and most females have a negative initial experienc , ,

It is this masculine narrative content of much computer ga
software that has received the most attention in explanations 0
difference between female and male interest in video games. As
shall see below, many analyses focus on the private experienc’
‘intimate relation’ with the machine ignoring the social dimension
interest in computing or in playing games. The predominantly m
interest in games is a function of time and a legacy of male adolescen
culture. Overall, girls simply have fewer opportunities to useco’
puters than boys because the experience of leisure time is that?
divided along sex boundaries. Like their mothers, girls have a lot
time to play at home because of their domestic responsibilities You
working~class daughters are expected to help with childcare and 0th
household tasks 1n a way that their brothers are not. Boys learnifrom
their fathers that-it is their right to concentrate totally on the compu,
if they choose, oblivious of the surrounding domestic environme
Males are more easily allowed to follow up interests which do not ha
to be justified as benefiting anyone else. ~

In addition, girls’ extracurricular activities are generally much mot“
restricted than boys. Parents are cautious about allowing girls test
after school in the unstructured environment of computer clubs.
Public places like video arcades, which are central to the leisur
culture of young male adolescents, are virtually off limits for mos

 

 

astery of the Machine: Viva la Difference?

*hroughout this chapter I have been arguing that cultural factors are
mportant in understanding the masculinity of technology. By thisI

mean that the absence of technical confidence or competence does
ndeed. become part of feminine gender identity, as well as being a
{sexualrstereotype Using the instructive example of computers, I have
xplored the interrelated social processes that make this technology
into an alien culture for girls. It is now time to consider an argument
hat has been‘enthusiastically received by many Western feminists —
that-technical performance is a feature of fundamental cognitive dif—
erence between the sexes. .

. . 1 There have been endless variations on the theme that men’s superior
achievement demonstrates their greater physical and mental capa-
L cities. Traditionally, the significant discrepancy between the sexes
their ability to work with technology was attributed to physical
,. trength or «weakness and feminists spent the best part of the I:
discrediting this doctrine of natural difference. I am prompte,
wonder if it is merely an accident of history that, just as there}
major Shift in the nature of technology from industrial to informatt”
technology, an increasing number of feminist accounts of worne
computers are themselves emphasizing cognitive sex—different

  
    
  
   
   
 
 
  
  

 

portrayed as fascinated with the machine itself, being ‘hard
in terms of computer programming, followers of mi

