   
    
    
   
    
    
   
   
  
   
  
   
    
   
    
    
   
     
    
   
  
  
 
    
   
    
  
  
   
  
    
  
    
  
  

Th 8 iii Environment 129
128 The Built Environment e u

haulage companies is a case in point. The hidden subsidy to comp

car users via tax concessions and road maintenance is anothe" " amen in the Slow Lane

ertain interests have conspired to make the motor car rule, the
sis of certain social groups have been sacrificed to this endd
«assumption «of car ownership discriminates against the poor an
workingclass in general, and women constitute a disproportionate
b6r ofthose affected. Older women and single mothers are arraong
poorest groups in society and have been literally left strand: I‘ll},
utside of, cities designed around the motor car. Althoug tl e
mobile did not create suburbia, it certainly expanded and acce e-
edthis process. The promotion of mass motortcar ownership fhas
nded to exacerbate a greater dispersal of reSidential settlement 0 ten
thout any other mode of transport provrded to serVicc such areas:i
. ese developments in transport policy have affected. women anh
differently}? Researcheehsautomobile. use in Britain, Nort
" erica and Australia indicatesthat proportionately more men thag
men have obtained drivers’ licences, and that male car owners at;
,sers far outnumber female. Furthermore, while most women resr e
caréowning«gshouseholds, evidence shows that women have cron-
itlerably less access to the ‘family car’. As a consequence o t is;
men are much more reliantthanmen on public transport to mee
V l e uirements. ‘ '
istéigwmens low mobility, their travel needs are expagdirgg as
increasing number of married women are entering the pm a oud
cc and as the location of health care, educational resources an) f
brewing facilities: become more dispersed. Changes in patterns of
_.nsumption and service provisron have increased theimpo; agicear
iarisport access for women. For example, With the advent o tde c b ,
rue—delivery services and corner stores gradually disappeare to e
"placed by car-oriented supermarket complexes resulting in a
L '{ficant increase in the proportion of time women spend on cool;
I ption activities. Even women who are not engaged in paid wot, _

must». make frequent journeys to serVice the domestic headset _,-the
03:33:12.1: women are its primary users, in many wayspubl’ic tran
artis not suitable for their needs and seems tailoredto men see
nee. Recent work by geographers has drawnattention tot-he sir,
he ‘time—space maps’ of the daily, weekly and-overall; fe .
nydividualsin their interactions with one another act asconstramts
human activity. It has pointed to the major discrepanci het
within social communities in terms of fettersa 0 "1-339:

government contribution to company - car users in London
exceedcdthe revenue subsidy to London’s public transport.~‘
So far the story of thetriurnph of the car over other forms of;
port technology may seem like another version of ‘the paths no a
argument, where people actively chose one type of technology"
ference toothers. However, in many cities that we now associate
thecar, other forms of transport were not solong ago bothxprefg
and extensively used. Contrary to. popular impressions, 'Los A113
is a sprawling metropolisnot because of the automobile, but i:
because it was built around the radial spurs of the electric rail
system. his-almost forgottentoday that in the United State t.
used‘to be a network of efficient and well-functioning urban andzin'
urban: rail systems in nearly every metropolitanarea. By 1917, :
were nearly 45,000 miles :of trolley tracks which attracted billid’
passengers. This transport system was not replaced by the mote
simply, because of - consumer choice. Rather, commercial int
joined forces at a key moment to close offal] other options andge

technology. , - . ‘
Beginning in the early 19303, General Motors and other automobil
tyreand oil interests, formed a holding company called National
Lines, whose sole . objective was to purchase electric rail . syste
around the country and convert them to-buses, which were manuf ,
tured and fuelled by members of the holding company. They acquir ,
more than 100 rail systems in 45 cities, dismantled the electrictline
and, paved over the tracks. By the late fifties, about 90 per cent oft ‘
trolley; network had been eliminated. The ultimate objective of
operation was to divert patrons of the earlier rail systems to Gene
Motors cars. According to Snell, the reasons for this were clear: in
subway car or electric rail car can take the place of from 50 to l
automobiles’.” In 1949 General Motors, Standard Oil of California
and Firestone Tyres were found guilty of anti—trust conspiracy,ibii
the damage had been done. By then, the political and economic powe
of the road lobby had succeeded in making American cities completel-
depeudentupon the automobile. If there is a single force responsible,
for preventing the development of a diversified, balanced anf
ecologically~sound system of mass transportation, which was well

within the bounds of the technologically feasible, it is the automotiv
and petroleum industries.

  
   
  
  

 

 

  

