30 The Technology of Production

pregnant women. Many surveys of users have reported physical and

such as vision problems, tenosynovitis or

pain, tension, headaches, nausea and
digestive problems, and depression. This is particularly so

psychological symptoms,
repetition strain injury, chest
dizziness,
fer those who were Subject to computerized work monitoring sug—
'gesting that the intensity of work is a major cause of these stress-
related illnesses. Setting strict limits on the time spent at terminals has
therefore been a major international issue in trade union negotiations
over new technology.

More generally, fears have been expressed that computerization of
office work would lead to a huge reduction in the number of office
jobs and the emergence of the ‘paperless office’. Word processors were
seen as a threat to typists’ skills which were being incorporated into
the new machines. Secretarial work for those few who remained
would be increasingly fragmented into routine and standardized tasks
subject to the control of the machine.

To understand the genesis of this negative position we need to look
at the framework in which the debate has developed. The terms of
the feminist discussion have been inﬂuenced by what is known as ‘the
labour process perspective’ or the deskilling debate, discussed in
chapter 1.3 Labour process theorists have criticized technological
determinism, arguing, that, far from constituting an autonomous
force determining the organization of work, technology is itself
crucially affected by the antagonistic class relations of production.
According to this view, capitalism requires the continuous application
of new technology to the fragmentation and cheapening of labour,

resulting in deskilling.

The introduction of information technologies into the office has
been seen as part of the general process of deskilling. The purpose is
to’i'nc’rease productivity and profit, in this case by deskilling typists
and incorporating the monitoring of work into the machinery itself.
Labour process analysis characterizes the office as a white-collar
replica of the assembly line, with office work broken into many sub-
tasks, each performed by a specialized worker, who loses both contact

with the total product and variety in the tasks performed. With this
rationalization of the office, the conditions of white~collar work
become increasingly like factory work. Hence the (well~known) term,
the ‘proletarianization’ of white-collar workers. Through this process,
management reduces the skill requirements of office work and thus

reduces labour costs. The result is that workers have less and less
control over the production process.

However, reality is more complex than the proletarianization thesis

    
   
 
   
 
  
  
   
  
  
   
 
    
  
  
   
 
  

The Technology of Production 3i

rests, as detailed empirical studies of technological change have
T‘tedly shown. In particular, they have questioned the eXistceince
ysimple tendency towards either the deskilling or the upgra mg
our. Indeed, with respect to the skill levels required for given
opposing tendencies of increased complexrty and of greater
ification and standardization have coexisted. Some aut ors
ed that the machinery itself had some inherent logic which
sedits impact to be uniform across the range of office jobs. In
identical equipment, in this case word processors, may have very
1 : ts on work ex erience. . .

3:223:55 of office autognation must consider the different pos1—
I of office workers within the white—collar hierarchy, the degree
ragmentation of office work before the introduction of word pil'o—
sins, and the requirements of particular employers at particu ar
'ods. Although the effects of particular technologies must vary in
ferent contexts, it-has becomérclear that the overall tendency is for
chnology-led changes to operate within and. reinforce preextstirciig
ifferences in the patterns of work. Technological change thus terci1 8
further advantage those who already have recognized skills an a

, f control over their work tas s. . .
egg: :ffects of new technology on typists and on secretaries in

 

 

ound that rather than automatiOn transforming these occupations 13
ntrenched the inequalities between them. The rationalizationi ant
augmentation of clerical work had in fact long predated the adven
computer technology and its introduction remforceds this tin enc:
, orvtypists to perform repetitive, standardized tasks. At t e samk
time, however, word processors reduced the burden of routine wolr
for the secretaries, enabling them to continue to do a variety of re a~
tively responsible tasks. Thus the introduction of word processors
exacerbated preexisting divisions between two groups of worrtiler:
office workers, enhancing the position of some secretaries but not t a
“Tbilifntradictory picture that emerges from attempts to develop
general theories of the evolution of office work is partly a result 0
the fact that inappropriate comparisons are made between experience:1
at different stages in the evolution of technologies. Given 'rapi f
changes in the technology itself ,_ in its uses, and in the cumulation ot
its effects, conclusions from one wave of technology 'may no
generalize to later waves. An examination of the technological trans—
formation of the American insurance industry is instructive here.
During the first wave of electronic automation, the computerization

