x Preface

Perhaps it is the new technologies of human biological reproduction
that have been most vigorously contested, both intellectually and
politically, by feminists in recent years. Chapter 3 explores the argu-
ments, placing them in the wider context of the growing supremacy
of technology in Western medicine.

There is now a substantial body of feminist writing on domestic
technologies and their bearing on housework. Chapter 4 examines this
research in conjunction with more mainstream (malestream) socio—
logical theories regarding the impact of technologies on the ‘post—
industrial’ home.

Chapter 5 deals with the built environment. The first section cons
siders the design of houses and their urban location. I argue that
sexual divisions are literally built into houses and indeed into the
whole structure of the urban system. The last section scrutinises trans
port technology and demonstrates how women in particular have been
disadvantaged by the design of cities around the automobile.

Picking up on issues from the previous four chapters, chapter 6
presents an analysis of technology as a masculine culture. I argue that
the close affinity between technology and the dominant ideology of
masculinity itself shapes the production and use of particular techno-
logies. The correspondingly tenuous nature of women’s relationship
to this technical culture is the subject of the second part of the chapter.

In the conclusion, I hope to convince the reader that a recognition
of the profoundly gendered character of technology need not lead to
political pessimism or total rejection of existing technologies. The
argument that women’s relationship to technology is a contradictory
one, combined with the realization that technology is itself a social

construct, opens up fresh possibilities for feminist scholarship and
action.

NOTES

1 For an introduction to this literature, see McNeil’s (1987, pp. 227—9)
bibliography on ‘Development, The “Third World” and Technology’. See
also Ahmed (1985).

2 Throughout this book I use the term ‘sex’ and ‘gender’ interchangeably.
This is symptomatic of the blurred boundaries that mark the distinction
between what is construed as ‘natural’ and what is construed as ‘social’.

 

'l

Feminist Critiques of ﬁScience

and Technology

Writing in 1844 about relations between men and women,.Marx said
that ‘[i]t is possible to judge from this relationship the entire‘level of
development of mankind’ (1975, p. 347). More commonly it is the
level of scientific and technological development that is taken as the
index of a society’s advancement. Our icons of progress are drawn
from science, technology ’andi‘iiiitedicine; we revere that which is
defined as ‘rational’ as distinct from that which is judged ‘emotional’.
As we approach the twenty-first century however we are no longer
sure whether science and technology are the solution to world prob-
lems, such as environmental degradation, unemployment and war, or
the cause of them. It is not surprising therefore that the relationship
between science and society is currently being subjected to profound
and urgent questioning. .
The development of a feminist perspective on the history and philo—
sophy of science is a relatively recent endeavour. Although this field
is still quite small and by no means coherent, it has attracted more

theoretical debate than the related subject of gender and technology.
It will become apparent in what follows, however, that feminists
pursued similar lines of argument when they turned their attention
from science to technology. I will therefore start by examining some
approaches to the issue of gender and science, before moving on to

look at technology.

The Sexual Politics of Science

The interest in gender and science arose out of the contemporary
women’s movement and a general concern for women’s position in the
professions. Practising feminist scientists have questioned the histori-
cal and sociological relationships between gender and sc1ence at least
since the early 19705. The publication of biographical studies of great
women scientists served as a useful corrective to mainstream histories

