 
  
  
   
  
 
 
    
  
     
   
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
  
    
     
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
   

9g Domestic Technolo
9y Domestic Technology 99

' famiiy home even though Cowan’s own historical findings
to men being well served by the private domestic sphere.

ommon feminist stress on the negative effects of domestic
ology has contributed to the view that women have been duped.
sa tendency among some feminist scholars to assume an
fied anti+technologicalstance and to imply that modern house—
‘ re worscoff than their grandmothers (Reiger, 1986, p. 110).
rendency is evident in those authors who stress the increasing
on ofvrthe domestic workerand, seedornestic labour as having
uch of, itscreativity and individualiternce we recognize that
echanization ofthehome did bring substantial improvements
l‘meniswdomestic working conditions, even while it also intro-
edzi‘lnewr-pressures,’ women seem less irrational. ‘When manufac-
_s,then, intheir own interests, marketed washing machines in
sot" “make your automaticiyour clothes basket and wash every
they were tapping into women’s experience of the problems of
‘izingglaundry,:andthe physical drudgeryit entailed. They were
opening up greater flexibility in managing some domestic tasks’
._;ger;: 1986, putts-16).

ainst this there is no doubt that people can be taken in by false
g'ses, especially where advanced technology is involved. Wanting
vetime and improve the quality of their housework and in turn
’ uality, of their home life, housewives are susceptible to well—
etedr advertising aboutéthe capacityof new appliances to meet their
ejeds. The ironyis that women haVe commonly blamed themselves
; he failure of technology to deliver them from domestic toil, rather
angrealizing that the defects lie in the design of technologies and the

I ial: relations within which they operate.

in imposmg new notions of domestic life on behalf of the ruling
hasrbeen overestimated, and the resistance they'engender’ed ign
Most of the available historical research is based on the rhetOr
the experts and ideologues rather than the reality of [workingc
womenfs lives. I he domestic science movement was never as
accepted as its advocates hoped (Reiger, 1985; 1986). The evid
rather suggests that womennegotiated the ideology of housew
and motherhood according to their actual circumstances and
mayor. contradictions underlay thisarattempt to rationalize dome”
life. Similarly, when the advertisers were playing onthese ideologi
elements inrrrnarketing the new-domestic products women act' :
partimpated insaccepting or rejecting this process. ’

In Britain in. the 19305, there already existed an ‘infrastructure’:
the communal provision of domestic appliances. There were mun
pal wash—houses and laundries, communal wash-houses gin ther’ol
tenement blocks,~and at this time severallocal authorities ex er
mented with ._ building blocks of ﬂats, modelled on those buip
Russmi- - and incorporating wash-houses, creches: and common
leisure-areas. However,~the communal provision of amenities was ‘ '
always seen as progressive. It was associated in many people’s mini
withtbacketmback houses, with'their shared water supply andsan’ita
t10n,.and acharacteristic squalid view of rows of dustbins and WCs
and thetapatthe end of the» street. Interestingly, class difference
emerged over this issue on the Women’s Housing Sub—Committee
with, some of the middle-class feminists on the committee more'
interested in the possibilities for communal childcare Vlaundries and:
other faculties. That working-class women favoured privacy andr‘clid-j
not favour communal arrangements may have‘been based on their"
own experience of communal" living in conditions of poverty
‘ It IS important to recognize the extent to which individual .choice
is constrained by powerful structuredforces. The available alterna?
tives to single-family houses were extremely limited, especially for the
working class. In fact, state policy in the area of housing and town
planningplayed a key role in promoting privatism. Without the exten-
srve provision of different options, it is not clear to what extent co 1
freely chose private domestic arrangements. 1) p 6

It is even less clear to what extent women, as opposed to men
exercrsed the degree of choice available. Oddly Cowan separates this
American preference for domestic autonomy from the sexual divi—
sron of domestic labour. No role is granted to men in choosing this

I, nlsz:Des_igns on Technology

, us far, my discussion of the literature on domestic technology
veals a preoccupationwith its effects on the organization of the
ousehold andswomen’s work in the home. However technologies are
" thesocially constructed and societyshaping. At a general level, I
aavegrargued‘that the predominance of the singlecfamily household
has-profoundly structured the form of technologythat has become
ailable. There has been much less attention given to the innova~
on, deveIOpment and diffusion processes of specific technologies

hemselves.
The forms of household equipment are almost always taken as

