102 Domestic T h
6-: nology Domestic Technology 303

  
   
 
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
  

- , until continued innovation and economies of scale allow sub-
ial reduction in costs or adaptation of technologies to household
mstances. Many domestic technologies were initially developed
ommercial, industrial and even defence purposes and only later,
anufacturers sought to expand their markets, were they adapted
home use. Gas and electricity were available for industrial pur-
ses and municipal lighting long before they were adapted for
domesnc use. The automatic washing machine, the vacuum cleaner
the refrigerator had wide commercial application before being
ﬂed down for use in the home. Electric ranges were used in naval
acommercial ships before being introduced to the domestic
" :ket. Microwave ovens are a direct descendant of military radar
nology and were developed for food preparation in submarines
he US Navy.l3 They were ﬁrst introduced to airlines, institutions

are relegated to the role of consumer —~ ‘they bought electric re,
gerators because they were cheaper’. Our understanding retinas
incomplete without research on design alternatives which shows“; i‘
the form of the household, and the sexual division of labour w I)
it, actively shape artefacts. We need much more work of this kin
what shaped these machines in the first place.12
An important dimension glossed over in the literature on

development of domestic equipment is the culture of engineeri
[after all, engineers do not simply follow the manufacturers’ dir
tives; they make decisions about design and the use of new techie
logies, playing an active role in defining what is technically possih‘

 

Despite the lucrative market that it represents, the household is not
ually the first area of application that is considered when new
chnologies are being developed. For this reason new domestic
pliances are not always appropriate to the household work that they
. esupposed to perform nor are they necessarily the implements that
Would have been developed if the: housewife had been considered first
'ndeed if she had had control of the processes of innovation.

it is no accident that most domestic technology originates from the
commercial sector, nor that much of the equipment which ends up in
rhesghome is somewhat ineffectual. As an industrial designer I inter—
ewed put it, why invest heavily in the design of domestic technology
When there is no measure of productivity for housework as there is
for industrial work? Commercial kitchens, for example, are simple
and functional in design, much less cluttered with complicated gadgets
and elaborate fittings than most home kitchens. Reliability is at a
premium for commercial purchasers who are concerned to minimize
their running costs both in terms of breakdowns and labour-time. By
contrast, given that women’s labour in the home is unpaid, the same
economic considerations do not operate. Therefore, when producing
for the homes market, manufacturers concentrated on cutting the
costs of manufacturing techniques to enable them to sell reasonably
cheap products. Much of the design effort is put into making
appliances look attractive or impressively high-tech in the showroom
— for example giving them an unnecessary array of buttons and
ﬂashing lights. In the case of dishwashers and washing machines, a
multitude of cycles is provided although only one or two are generally

consuming housework, little is heard of them. One such example:
Gabes innovative self-cleaning house (Zimmerman 1983) Franc
Gabe, an artist and inventor from Oregon spent 27 ye’ars buildin and
perfecting the self-cleaning house. In effect, a warm water mistgdo

Gabe was ridiculed for even attempting the impossible but architects
and burlders now admit that her house is functional and attractiv ‘y

One cannot help speculating that the development of an effective self ’
cleaning house has not been high on the agenda of male engineer I“,

 

Domestic Technology: A Commercial Aﬂerfhought

 

Thefact 18 that much domestic technology has anyway not been
specrfically designed for household use but has its origins in ver
different‘spheres. Consumer products can very often be viewed ass,
technology transfers’ from the production processes in the formal
economy to those in the domestic informal economy.

Typically, new products are at first too expensive for application
to household activities; they are employed on a large scale by industry

