  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
    
   
  
   
  
   
 
  
  
  
    
    
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
   
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
 
  

78 Reproductive T h
ec nology Reproductive Technology 79

, fertilization, egg donation, embryo donation and artificial insemination
to stable, cohabiting heterosexual couples.
I would like to draw the reader’s attention to McNgil, et al. (1990) which

does locate reproductive technologies within the sociology of techno-
'gy.‘The~collection only came into my hands as this book went to press.
Feminists have also been concerned to expose the increase in hystea
' ectomy, particularly for black and Third World women, as a form of
involuntary sterilization or as ‘a simple solution to everything from
, backaches to contraception’ (Homans, 1985, p. 5).

;.See.also,Arney (1982) and Richards (1978).

VMartin (1987, p. 48). Although this negative medical imagery pervades
_ :ornen’s own images of theirbodies, involving extreme fragmentation
~ f thegself, women also resist. By analysing the different speech women
so according to theirclass and race, Martin provides examples of how
{omen generate their own more self-respecting meanings for menstrua-
tion, menopause, andg.birth. Interestingly she discovered that white
: middle~class women were...,f re likely to uncritically accept the
egemonic medical model of their bodies than working-class women,

lack or white.
This account is drawn from Reiser (1978). See also Foucault (1973) and

Jewson (1976).
N This is not to deny that subsequently the stethoscope did become tech-
nically ‘superior’.

It recently emerged that American insurance firms are taking a keen
,nterest in the development of genetic screening for its potential use in
the recruitment of employees. ,

In fact, Haraway (1985) and Yoxen (1986) argue that this biotechnology
revolution is also a cultural revolution, in that the very meaning of life
is being transformed. With the development of genetic engineering, the
. dominant image of nature becomes one of organisms as information—
processing systems that can be reprogrammed. ‘Thus our image of nature
iscoming more and more to emphasise human intervention through a

process of design’ (Yoxen, 1986, p. 30).

_, hecl-assic study is Himes (1936).
Even Rosenberg (.1979, p. 50), normally such an astute critic of techno—

], gical determinism, falls into this trap: ‘ . . . one might therefore well
argue that the women’s liberation movement is essentially due to the
combination of declining fertility (in turn partly attributable to a more
effective technology of contraception), on the one hand, and the elec-
ification of, the household chores, on the other. One need not be a
chnological [determinist to argue that the social benefits of the n
:' ound freedom of women in American Society are, in large measure, the
product of technological innovation."

hat the invention of reproductive technologies often long predate their
widespread use is evidenced by, for example, artificial insemina-
tion. Although we think of this as a radical new means of separating

ﬁzzntoiznéhﬁggger, Wtfgtzn’s increased-sexual independence has
_ ~ cost. ,t e gains rforrwomen o t ‘ ' I
it is because of the achievem u weigh that loss
4 , cuts of the women’s m ‘
the technology per se The P' ovement and I ,0
‘ . 111 has not brought about ’ ‘ '
tron; women have‘gained Control ' ‘ women-shite:
. ._ over t '
Donna] mobilization- heir lives through socral a:
in 22:53:13.5: of this section has been to suggest that sexual relatio
, - r n wrt population policies and k ' y' '
shaped contraceptivetechnolo ' mar Ct forces ha
. , gy. And =m turn the d ' >
the technology: has been cru ' ' , ’ esngn» or for:
~ cial torts use In order to mid " ‘
‘ _ g . . erstandw
particularrtechnologtes havevthe effects they do, this chapter hasmp’:

 

$23333: 3631: 51:16: (lilf htgman reproduction in particular. Wit
. - , ‘ ” * Is as een the ,masculinization f
was prevtously a‘women’s sphere w 0 an ”cam
~ _ omen who are alread ad '
in secret)! have been in a positior; t ‘ y. vantag,
_ . c benefit from rec 4 ' ‘V
techniques In this area as cut I'CDI'OdUCU:

. elsewhere technolo ies o ' ' ‘

o o c 0 er g,
reinforce preseinsting socral inequalities. g I) ate Within?“

NOTES

I _
2:31 féaéiworttl: (1987, pp. 10—11) for a categorization of the variou
2 As Michfllf: ; t :1 are grouped under the term ‘reproductive technologies
. _ wor pointed out to me the to ‘ t i ' -
tron Is also endorsed by the historia ’ p -ln_ervent10mst’p0
. _ , n Edward Shorter (1983
With Firestone a belief that wo ' ' )Who Sha
. men are the Victims of th ' b '
that twentieth—centu ' '6er miles an
to men. ry medical technology has released them to be eq

3 According to a recent estimate (Rowland, 1988), the success rate

4 git-vino fertilization schemes is only about 10 percent

to :iolgzex‘he belief that; the maternal instinct is normal does not appl

men or to esbians. The Warno k C ' ' ‘ "

(set up to advise the UK G c ommittee m 3mm
overnment on reproductive techno] ‘

' . 0 es

for example recommended restricting such techniques as in-fiitro-

