   
  
   
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
   
 
  
   
  
   
  
   
   
  
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
 

1106 Domestic Technology Domestic Technology l0?

'n‘ the house. For example, domestic appliances ‘belong’ in the
11, along with Women, and communications technology such as
ision are found 1n the ‘family room’. This signals the way in
he physical ferm and spatial arrangement of housing itself
s’ assumpuons about the nature of domestic life —- an issue to

substantial body of literature on the history of housework an]:
distision1110f labour-instheehome. In recent years too-theretha '
growing; i‘iuterest win: «domestier‘technology both- 11among‘ :fe
:theosi s;::and~, :zfrom‘ air;different:perspective; among: "post‘uin‘d
fsociet, theorists 1 1his‘:s::work-1=1~fis‘1 still "relatively underdeveloped
1:1nueh rerof ' the: literature % ’VshareS11‘:a' : technicist , orientation :’ ‘1 w
optimisticor pessimistic «in outlook. Technology ischmmonl
:trayedgsas:sthezvprime 2mover in: social “change, 1 carrying people
wake,~for1 bettersor 1worse.*:iBut: history ‘1 isc‘littered i iwith 1 exam
alternative waysrof organizingthouseworkfand- Withéalternatia’c d ,_
for machincsweenovvtake‘for:11grantedt inrretrieving':theselostop
from :‘obscurity the centrality of peopliss'1 actions: and ‘cho L1,
highlighted: and with them the social shaping of technology that
nishes: our lives. " 1

An adequate analysis of the social shaping of domestic techno
cannot be conducted only at the level of the design of indi
technologies. The significance of domestic technology lies i
location at the interface of public andp’rivate worlds. The fit
meni inzithepublic sphere of industry ,i‘inventionrandif commercecd,
and:<-‘ produce etcchnology '-:f0r use by women in ‘theé‘private-dom
sphere,» reflects r and embodies ’- a complex web of patriarchal:
capitalistrelations. Although: mechanization xhastransformed
home,; it has 51101 liberated [women from domestic; drudgery 1n
straightforward way. Time budget research ' leaves us wonde
whether technology has led to more ﬂexibility to heuseWOrk: or to,
intensification. To further our understanding of these issues we '11,
moregqualitative research on how people organize housework and:
technology: in [a variety of: household formsivsuch research ‘ .sho
distinguish between differentim‘type‘s 'ofi domestic technology
examine the significance of gender 11111 people’s: affinity With techrr
logy;: Finally, the designers of domestic technology themselves be
so far been subjected to very little inVestig’ation; an examination
theirxebackgrounds, interests’,*‘and motivation m‘ay'shed light on
development of; particular products. By refusing to taketechnologi
for~«1granted we help“? to 1amake1 visible :the relations‘of structu“ "
inequality that give rise to them. 1

 

 

ctz (1965) 1s one of the earliest articles inquiring into the historical
act of domestic technology on housework. For detailed references,
owan ’5 (11983:) bibliographic essays at the back of the book and
1 cil (119817, pp. 229:30). See also Bose at 211.0984), for a comprehen-
porary research As they point out, this
n the ‘ideal’ white middle—class family,
1, , , e on variations across class and ethnic
cups; neither does it encompass single-parent households or people
us alone: The data is also limited by its failure to reflect different
tages of the life cycle. A similar problem exists with much of the
tstorical literature, as McGaw (1982,11 813) notes. This has led many
uthors to exaggerate the; rate of diffusion of domestic devices.
See also Ruth Schwartz Cowan (1976 and 1979).
here is now quite an extenSive feminist literature on the domestic
ience movement and its attempt to elevate the status of housekeeping.
See, for example, Ehrcnreich and English (1975,1979) and Margolis
985) on America; Davidoff (1976) and Arnold and Burr (1985) on
ritain; and Reigcr (1985) for Australia Reiger’ 3 book, The Dis»
,, nchantmem of. the: Home, is the most interesting sociologically as she
attempts to combine a feminist analysis of the role of the professional
d1 technical experts of the period with a critique of instrumental
. eason. The infant welfare and domestic science movements are seen as
eing part of a general extension of ‘technical rationality’ in the modern
world. 1
1 1 am only referring to domestic technology here, as clearly medical
echnology 1s central to demographic changes In life expectancy and to
birth control. ,
18cc Bose et al. (11984), Rothschild (1983). and Thrall (1982).
In my own qualitative study (1983) in a small market town in Norfolk
England, I found that men always did the "outdoor jobs — mowing the ,
awn, gardening, fixing the car, household repairs and, to a lesser eaten
aiming and decorating While the husbands did have a respon . ‘y ,
1 for performing certain household tasks, these had very
characteristics from those the women performed. Of course, 1 ,
trast is exaggerated and depends partly on conventional concepuo

 

This portrait of domestic technology is certainly incomplete. In thi
chapter I have concentrated on domestic‘technology as a “set
physical objects or artefacts and argued that gendered meanings ar
encoded in the design process. This process involves not 0111
specifying the user but also the appropriate location'of tcchnologie

  
  
 
 

