32 The Technology of Production

of some aspects of underwriting and rating occurred without major
reorganization of production, leading to job loss amongst traditional
female clerical workers. Barbara Baran (1987) argues that it was in
the late 1970s that the insurance industry was radically restructured
and“ that this was accompanied by the feminization of that labour
force. While the early use of computers was based on, and reinforced,
the fragmentation of jobs within established hierarchies, the newer
applications of information technology integrated fragmented tasks
to Create new jobs, while often eliminating old ones. By 1983, a new
highly skilled clerical position had been designed for women with
college degrees. In this industry, automation had resulted in the
deskilling of male professional functions with female professionals
earning considerably less than the men previously did. However,
although skilled clerical positions had expanded, there was little
opportunity for career advancement. Furthermore, the increased
emphasis on college education, with the loss of unskilled clerical jobs,
was likely to narrow opportunities for less educated black and white
urban Werking-class women.

This study shows how important it is to periodize the process of
technological change. It also points to the different effects automa-
tion may have on different groups of women workers at different
times.

As I said above, many of these studies of office automation were
heavily inﬂuenced by labour process theory. They concentrated on the
way, in which, capitalist management used new technologies to deskill
and subordinate workers. The deskilling of craft workers was, and
largely'still is, the central issue in this analysis of technical change.
DraWing on these studies of deskilling in male crafts, the studies on
officeWork tended to romanticize the=typist’s job before the intro-
duction of word processors by depicting it as a combination of techni-
cal craft-type skills with control over the labour process.

women’s office work is not akin to craft work. Craft workers were
an elite group who enjoyed a privileged position in the labour market
and considerable autonomy over the labour process. Not only is this
romanticized version wrong in the specific instance of office work,
but it is wrong in general terms. Women have traditionally been
excluded from craft labour. An analysis based on the loss of craft
skills is thus not a relevant one for women. _

The more substantive problem reflected in these early studies was
the assumption that the social relations within which technology
developed could be understood simply in terms of relations between
worker and capitalist. This underestimated the continuing significance

  
    
   
  
  
   
  
   
   
   
   
  
 
   
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
   

The Technology of Production 33

' isions within the working class, such asthose based on sex, moi,
nd skill, in shaping the effects of technical, change, on the wor ~

eminist Writers have been important in shifting the focus from
maps; _. concern with class conﬂict. In particular, they haze
,: the inappropriateness of the craft model by highlighting t s
vitryg-of craft unions as male preserves. Craft unions have playe
.e-r‘part increatingand sustaining women s subordinate posxtion
.orkforce. Any understanding of technology Will be incomplete
"at the recognition that the relations of production are con-
ted as much out of gender divisions as class drvrsrons.

 

 

V’Tyyechnology and Gender Relations

more recent work on gender and technology goes beyond looking
omen workers astsucthather it has taken up this issue of lel-
V, etWeen workers andfocused on the relationship between men
omen in the workplace, the implications for the construction
ibs-zéand the sex—typing of occupations. This has been part of thle1
g recognitionof the limitations of socmlogtcal accounts whtc

ysewmnen’s position in the labour force primarily With reference

ic division of labour. . . .

1115;111:605: to deny that women’s disadvantaged posrtron in the
or market is in large part due to their greater responsrbihty for
pendent care and household tasks, as I have exploredelsewhere
ajcman, 1983). However gender relations are embodied in 1t‘he
.phere of produCtion, as well as in the sphere of reproduction. T us
legender stereotyping of jobs is not Just a reflection of women cs
traditional role within the family; it is also formed and reproduce

» i rchal relations of paid work. . ‘
S2131: :grrfmentators have presumed that with technological devel-
opments, such as the elimination of much heavy physrcal work by
mechanization, the boundaries between womens and mens wor

would gradually disappear. From a different perspective, the labour

rocess literature pres _ . - -
grated into the labour force as technology led to its mcreasmg homo

, " ion Liff, 1986, p.75). .
,gegiaéeverf the gender stereotyping of jobs has remained remarkably
stable even when the nature of work and the skills required to perform
it :have been radically transformed. The. broad nature of gender
.L divisions in the labour market is well established: men and women are
‘ segregated into different occupations, and this segregation IS part;
ticularly marked within individual workplaces. Women are, 0

 

 

 

