l38 Technology as Masculine Culture

activity in question. The chapter also examines women’s relation
to masculine cultural worlds.

Mon and Machines

Giving Birth to the Bomb: Virility and the Technology of
Destruction ’

Contemporary feminist peace initiatives, like their forebears, h
focused attention on the relationship between masculinity and
Warfare is traditionally a male preserve and the connection be
physical violence and men-in both the public and private spher“
strong. So strong in fact that much feminist writing assumes the
in the same way as rape, is the result of men’s inherently aggre '
nature. The weaponry of war is seen asintrinsically masculine :s
cruise missiles have become a symbol of male power, the phallus
is a paradigm of masculine practices because its pre-eminent value.
of violence and destruction resonates throughout other male relati
ships 1 relationships to other cultures, to the environment and, part;
larly, to women. Thus the threatened destruction of world civilizat
by nuclear arms is seen as the culmination of male develops

psychology, arguing that men need asubstitutezfor the babies
cannot conceive.l Ironically, the most comprehensive'account o
fundamentally radical feminist position is ~~by"a man,»Brian Easlea
his Fathering the Unthinkable (1.983)

Drawing on the feminist analysis of the development of scienc ,
a form of domination of both nature and women, Easlea explainst
creation of nuclear weapons in. terms of the masculinity of scie
He argues that ‘the nuclear arms race is in large part :underwri
by masculine behaviour. in the pursuit and application of scient
inquiry’ (p. 5). The book details the story of the discovery of radi,
activity and the development of the atomic bomb and vividly describes
the excitement and intense competitiveness of theprominent scientis
who were involved. Easlea’s purpose is to critique the kind of ‘tech .
cal rationality’ that dictated the making of the atomic bomb, reflect:
so clearly in J. Robert Oppenheimer’ 5 statement that ‘when you s

something that is technically sweet you go ahead and do it and you
argue about what to do about it only after you have had your technical

success’ (p. 129). »
What 18 striking 18 not only the compulsive nature of the work done

  
 
  
  
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
 
   
  
   
   
   
 
   
  
 
 

Technology as Masculine Culture 139

"this group of men but the overriding pleasure and sheer joy they
rerienced in achieving technological perfection. ‘Nobody worked
essthan 15, 16,, 17 hours a day. There was nothing else in your life
, his passion to get it done’ (p. 84). They saw themselves as pioneers
hefrontiers of what was only just possible, on a ‘fantastic adven~
e’ to being the first to release the aWesome power locked in the
lens. The LosAlamos physicists’reaction to the (trapping of the
mbeon Hiroshima makes particularly chilling reading. Prominent
tists recalled the exultation, celebration and pride they felt in the
ectiveness of the weapon, how Oppenheimer was cheered by the
ire staff ofsthelaboratory like a ‘prize fighter’, and how they
toyed'ta‘hastily arranged champagne dinner’. ‘The only reaction I
wember,’ Richard Feynman recalls, ‘.. .was a very considerable
, n and excitement. .I was involved in this happy thing,

3e,.dying:.and struggling in Hiroshima’ (Easlea, 1983, p. 112). The
rcipal reason forfthe establishment of the Manhattan Project was
:séfear that-«Nazi Germany‘would develop atomic weapons. Easlea
kes much of the fact that work on the atomic bomb aetually
insifiedafter Nazi-Germany had surrendered to the Allied armies.
ror ,Easlea, this behaviour can be accounted for in terms of these
male, scientists substituting for their lack of feminine procreative
ower, that: is, ‘womb envy’. Men ‘give birth’ to science and weapons
Oatcompensate for their lack of the ‘magical power’ of giving birth to
ethics. He argues: that this is demonstrated by their pervasive use of
ggressivesexualand birth metaphorstotdescribe their work, such
that-the first uranium bomb, which was dropped on Hiroshima, was
amed ‘Little Boy’. This imagery signifies unconscious male motiva~
ons, ‘phallic psychology’, which makes such technical inventions

arms on the respective male achievers and thereby underwrite a claim
masculinity
. Unfortunately Easlea’ 5 account is strongly suggestive rather than

analytical. As Adam Farrar (1985, p. 61) comments, these birth and

_ ape metaphors o‘nly show that the means of representing significant

practices in a male dominated culture are constructed in terms which

are significant to men. They don’t show that the practices so
represented are necessarily masculine’. Although thought-provoking,
Easlea’s examination of the arresting metaphors used by scientists

