  
   
  
   
    
   
   
   
   
 
 
  
   
   
    
  
  
   
  
   
   
 
  
 
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
   
  
 
   
  
   

lib The Built Environment The Built Environment H7

"e; division of labour. was not transformed by these architec-
" ﬁgesl- However, they did obscure the extent to which women
ed oibear responsibility for servicing the family. Typically,
owa tablet, in the kitchen for eating at, again signifying
annallifestyle. The open-plan kitchen enabled mothers to
“ hii’dren whilecooking the meal, as children were now seen
‘ngreonstant attention and companionship. This partially
heimove of the kitchen to the back of the house with a picture
pokingout on the garden.

to for this-increased concern with children’s needs, the multi-
OOm.« which later :became known as the ‘family room’, came
Incee‘Although the family room most often served as a place
ti 11:11 Could» do as they pleased in the midst of clutter and
as also an architectural expression of family togetherness.’
1981, 'p.,255)“V: “:littl privacy is provided for individuals
he house, which bottom , rimarily a place for shared activi-
bedrooms now, prov1ded for the children are generally small,

VVthatktheyV-will spend most of their time in the larger family
dults?inrtheahousesare’assumed to need even‘less private
jpecially womenﬁEven the parents’ bedroom belongs to ‘the
omen donot havea «room of their own, their spatial needs
ubsumed-into the familyis; if they have a domain it is the

Housing the Symmetrical Family

If the Second World War posed a challenge to‘traditionalse
this was to leave little trace on the design of houses. In fac ‘
war period saw the revitalization of the ideology of separa
for women and men. The major housing construction program
the 19505 and 19603 coincided with women being pushed 1b,
the home to tend theirhusbands and children.‘ The shousin
which predominates today’dates frontier bearsthestarnp
period.,rWith thezrapid’ growth of owner—occupation. greater
was: placed on a more «home—centred» iilife‘Style : for men .. ,—
women‘. «The idea of companionate marriage saw the f;
increasingly sharing activitiesandcultivating intimate ‘relati
the comfort of a private horned-lore ‘good’: communication ,tV-inti
awareness or thenceds- of others, sharedleisure (often ‘i’s‘har
sumption) gained a prominence previously acCorded to hy ‘
nutrition. But far all these apparent changes, the contin

    

   

 

 

found;:>than the discontinuities. ,

its main expression in the open-plan housing design that charact
the postwar period. The darkdivided house gave way to apre V
forilight and open space, breaking down traditional divisions 'b’ie
formality and mformahty :m behaviour. Architects promoted t _
of multifunction spaces and zoned’ planning 1n houses beca
norm. Spaces were demarcated for certain functions, but “t
achieved without separate rooms. The ‘activity area’ of the
room, dining area, and kitchen had few walls, providing a ‘
space and togetherness as possible. The lack of walls was thou
promote the modern ideology of marital equality. Famous
open-plan interiors, Frank Lloyd Wright’s domestic architectu:
nevertheless faithful to the Victorian icOnography of family i ,
placing a massive hearth at the very centre of his house design;
Domestic servants had ﬁnally completely bowed out of the
and consequently the illusion that meals simply arrived 1n the di
room— as if from nowhere— could no longer be sustained. The
therefore less reason to have a separate :kitchen and dining roo,

‘astiftwenty. years have witnessed major shifts in the social
, moi-women and in the way women see themselves. Paradoxi-
his: period “has also been characterized by a renewed rhetoric
omen assoft, feminineand housebound which is increasingly
g: 7th reality. The white plastic, clinicalkitchen has given way
re cosy :icountry kitchen’ with pine-panelled walls and natural
nishes.zLaura Ashley patterned floral prints recall the cheerful
ty.;of’rural*life.: Although most newhouses now have central
ting, the fireplace remains the focal point of many living rooms,
furniture grouped around it. 5 It is still the place of the most
ive furniture, with faint echoes of the Victorian parlour.
,1: kitchen meanwhile has become the emotional centre of the
:zrittis from here that therelaxed, informal, symmetrical family
. 1e: radiates. Power relations within the patriarchal family have
”me-submerged,by'this ideology of togetherness. Thus the proto-
for the modern house prescribed the form of household that
uld inhabit it, namely the white middle—class nuclear family. As
. twas not only oppressive to most wOmen, but also a markedly
ocentric design, denying the existence and needs of other forms

 

This open design gave domestic work a more egalitarian appearan
as other members of the family shared the space, and by implica ,1
the tasks, hitherto allocated to women alone. As we know,”th

 

