 
   
    
 
  
  
   
     
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
    
   
  
  
 
 
  
  

92 Domestic Technology
Domestic Technology 93

the sacral nature of human desires and preferences, '

on prlces_ The household will Choose between alternative tech :ofoffermg more efftcrent machines, replacmg the twm tub With

utomatic. At the same time, the desire for clean laundry will
to stabilize — slowing the rate of growth inclothes to be washed.
e,-eventually, time spent in laundry will start to fall. Thus,
hurry argues, an effect of this move to a self—service economy,

However Gershun
, , y assumes . I ‘
that people have unchan the-amount of time spent on housework has declined Since 1960

r ,_ . . ging desires
espond to market Signals, making narrowly economic decisie

primarily in terms of prices but also in terms of domestic labour ‘

 

rshuny is so convinced that new technologies increase the
ductivity of domestic labour that, in a recent paper with Robinson
), he takes issue with the feminist ‘constancy of housework’
s.;;Whilst conceding that prior to the 19605 the time spent by
en on domestic work did remain remarkably constant, he insists
:a shift occurred at that point. Drawing on evidence from
budget surveys in the USA and UK, as well as Canada, Holland,
ark and Norway, he. concludes that domestic work time for
on has been declining sincé‘ithe 19603, and even that men do a
more than previously. It is central to his argument that this
so, even after taking into account the effects of such socio-
ographic changes as more women having paid jobs, more men
ng unemployed, and the decreasing size of families. Therefore the
sion of domestic equipment into households must have had some
fact in reducing domestic work time. As Gershuny comments
where: ‘it would seem perverse to refuse to ascribe a substantial
of this reduction to the diffusion of domestic technology’ (1985,
151).
n, fact on closer inspection, these findings are more in line with
, inist theories about constancy of domestic work than the authors
uld lead us to believe. Although the central argument is that
omestic work time has been declining for women between the 19605
tithe 1980s, this is only the case with respect to ‘routine’ domestic
lurk. Unpaid work is subdivided into three categories: routine
mestic chores (cooking, cleaning, other regular housework), shop-
‘ing, and related travel, and childcare (caring for and playing with
,hildren).8 While routine domestic work has declined, the time spent
childcare and shopping have substantially increased.
This finding, however, is entirely consistent with the feminist
'mphasis on the added time now devoted to shopping and childcare.
rtainly the feminist concern with the constancy of housework has
,mployed a broader notion that includes childcare and shopping. To
argue that domestic labour time has reduced is only meaningful if it
means that leisure or discretionary free time has increased. If however
mechanization results in less physical work but more ‘personal

 

 

 

‘ ‘ . . . crest between famil memb
differential distribution of tasks and money, 3am! thi:ririoet‘yer‘):a

influence how decisions actually come about.

    
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  

developments are not linear however.
model 18 that it predicts first a rise, then a plateau

it ' '
doigge‘apierlgeegg fountmg the housewife’s labour. But clearly the
n on aundry goes it t h' ' ’. A
beca f _ - p a t is pomt. And rect
use it IS a cheaper form of washing clothes, it becomesiiatitftfg

to wash more clothes more ' '
for Clean laundry. often, to satisfy (high) marginal desires

In the second phase

. 3 WhCI‘ ‘ ' - .
difoSEd, competition b e waShmg machines are fairly Widely

etween manufacturers at least partly takes the

