   
    
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
    
  

l34 The Built Environment The Built Environment l35

, For all that I have been stressing that the car is a fetishized object
for men, this is not the whole story nor the full extent of the gender
‘ lations embodied in the car. The design of the ‘family car’ reflects
assumptions about the typical size of unit in whichgpeople Wish to

Car manufacturers consciously design and style the appearance! L
their products to express consumer dreams, desires and aspiratiofi
In turn, consumers purchase, along with their car, an image an
social identity. Cars are'infused with powerful visual messages a
the’age, sex, race, social class and lifestyleof the user. Cars a
major feature of conspicuous consumption for men and have a centr
place inmate culture. The masculine fantasies they represent :9
different forms, ascan be seen by the contrasting designs of smoot
aerodynamic—style sports cars and the rugged, four-wheel-drive ‘r
rovers’. These have in common their symbolization of indivi’
freedom and self-realization. Countless-novels, films, popular so
and advertisementsr-romanticize ﬂight in a Car and link cruising at
the road with liberation. For men, cars afford a means of escape ifr
domestic responsibilities, from family commitment, into a realm :
private fantasygautonomyaand control. , ‘

Even more markedly than the car, the motorcycle is a symbol

  

sity to which they aspire for relief from drudgerya
home. They are also arelatiyely safe means "on
iolence and harassmenf’ftoeietiich women are sup
ransport.‘ And despite the prevalence of jokes align
n fact they are if anything more competentth

ikely to cause car accidents. Indeed the particular
caroffers women sets up a tension for eco-ferm
nstitutes a major environmental hazard, :IIQI',
he short term, demanding 'fegual accesstto. the
ant assertion of their right to independence

afety. , , . 2 ,

  

  

 

  

object that represents physical toughness, virility, excrtement, spec
danger , and skill. Their conspicuous bodywork and mechani
resonate with their original military use, and speak of aggression an
virility. Alongswithjleather jackets, riders wear grease-Stained jean
to express their technical competence. The experience of riding abik
encapsulates the outdoor, roving‘life of the wanderer with no ties
also symbolizes a form of man’s mastery of the machine; a powerfu
monster between his, legs which ii‘h’c must tame. Trucks similarly : i
the giant iron horses of independent men who refer tothemselves a
‘cowboys’ and boast of sexual encounters on the road. It is no acciden

     
 
  

    
   
  

 

      
 
     

     

  
  

 

  
       
     
 
  

  

' Inthis chapter I have been concerned touestab
5 between the built environment and patriarchy ,

 
 
   
 
  

women’s place and women’s place being
, are not only physically built into houses,
structure. Themodern city is, furthe' _,
mode of transport that reflects and is' orga "
the detriment of women. Once we recogni
the design and production of the builtemg
lenger; seen as fixed, we can begin to. make

 
 
  

  
   
 
    

 
 
 
   

mance.’ (Chambers, 1983, p. 308). Cars have long been a metaphor
for sex and something wild in the already tamed urban environment;
In recentyears this imagery has become overlaid with new associations -
of the latest high tech computerization, bringing to the fore men’s;
fascination with the power of technology — a theme further explored
in the next chapter. '

 

  
  

NOTES

  

1 According to w. and D. Andrews (1974, pgsi, ,_
‘made possible the literal centralization ofthe wont

  

