  
 
   
  
  
   
  
  
   
 
  
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
   
  
     
 
  
   
 
   
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
  
 
  

164 Conclusion Conclusion 165

;__ 75 points to the need for a more radical critique of technology
_ ertain kindsof technology are inextricably linked to particular
'iitionalized patterns of power and authority. Despite the fact that
seabeen arguing against essentialist values, theradical feminist
' ution to the debate has been important in politicizing science
chriology» However, in so far as their emphasis is exclusively
a 'archal relations, they presume that if women were in control
nology theywould be able to apply these technologies in
eficral. ways. For all that women might design better products,
going at the level of the individual product is limited by wider
I and economic structures.

' itintegral part of these wider structures, which has been subjected
__ ical analysis by the women’s movement and the radical science
.ement, is «the notion of technical expertise. By unmasking tech-
_ gy’sr supposed neutrality, the social shaping approach demystifies
‘ayers of expert knowledgegthat are pivotal to the power of various

_ I, believe that there is room for an effective politics are
access to technological work and institutions. There arezop
for disruption in the engine-rooms of technological pr L’
involvement of more women in scientific and technologi
technology policy, education and so on, may bring. -
advances in redesigning technology and constitute a shall ‘
male culture of technology. Working in these «sphere,
necessarily entail cooption into the world of patriarchal
behavrour. As the proportion of women engineers ’ gr
example, the strong relationship between the cultureEo
and hegemonic masculinity will eventually be dismantled
new forms of femininity and new patterns of dominance the.
even small changes have a cumulative effect on gender rela
broadly understood. o l

This is «not to deny that women pay a high price for ven -
such male-dominated territory. For many women thep
high- requiring them to sacrifice major aspects of the
identity. No equivalent sacrifice has been expected of men. Th
ttftcatton; with technology has: been taken for granted, «
absence cast as women’s problem. But women’s problem'is rite
have to learn that technology is not ‘theirs’ and give up the p":
and power that go with this construction of masculinity. Hit"
the dependson transforming gender power relations which
requires changing the nature of work itself so that childcar
housework can be equally shared. Access politics alone,
succeed because the institutions themselves are founded 'onig
inequality. L

Strategies to increase women’s participation are anyway limi

the extent to which power relations are inscribed in the techno}
themselves. Women’s reluctance ‘to enter’ cannot be seen as irr ’
given that so much; technological development is devoted to

onopolized by men. Men’s appropriation of technology is central
heir privileged position in paid production. For example, I have
gued that technology has been and is the key to consolidating the
[wet of the male medical profession. Technology plays a different
is in different masculinities, but the power relation is still there.
ain kinds of work experience, in particular men’s, is recognized
‘ :‘technical’ and legitimated gas expertise. Women’s knowledge and
skillshave: been traditionally undervalued. Contesting this involves
sexamining the accepted definitions of expertise and challenging the
sexual division of labour which sustains them. Technical competence
isgcertainly not the only source of male power, but it is an important
one, especially in relation to women.
' Breaking the nexus between experts and technology is one of the
projects of the ‘alternative technology’ movement. Attempts to design
ocially useful products’ have Opened up technology to wider public
participation. In doing so they have given rise to a profound ques—
tioningof the nature of technology itself, the design methods used,
and the way work is organized. Although this movement has many
strands, its aim is to put social use and need before profit and involve
working people in the processes of technological planning, design and
production. Although these initiatives have lent substance to the
_ possibility of developing different kinds of technology, they have con—
centrated on producing skill-enhancing technologies for male craft
workers. As such, they have questioned neither the masculinity of skill
definitions nor what counts as a product.2 Women’s interests and

 

the environment. Much of the research on electronics in this ce
hasbeen sponsored by the military, especially in the UnitedSt es
Military exrgencies and military support have been crucial i

development of ‘civilian’ technologies, such as the» digital compute
Even apparently pure science is often funded for military purp

For example, one of the major reasons for research on the earth
gravrtational field is how to make nuclear missiles more accurate s
that they can destroy opposing nuclear forces in a first strike.

