  
 
  
   
  
  
 
   
  
  
   
 
   
  
 

48 The Technology of Production The Technology of Production 49

est in automation if skilled and cheap labour power is available to
2 oh.

3 here is an important link between women ’s status as unskilled
. paid workers, and the uneven pace of technological develop-
aditionally it is women who sew and they have been available
iv ages, either in Third World countries or as migrant labour
rn capitalist countries. The fact that clothing workers are
aszunskilled isdue in large measure to their lack of industrial
whichis in turn due to the large. pool of women «whose social
jn forcesthem to compete in this areaof work. It is not possible
body to sit down at a sewing machine and sew a garment
out. previous experience. To be a competent machinist demands
iderable knowledge and experience with the machine. Although
‘e: area where women are at ease with machines, this is seen

technology in Noble’ 5 example, he demonstrates how the demand 2f
management control coincided with the command and control go
of the military. He also shows how the ideology and interest
engineers who take the View that the most automated is the mo
advanced and that; the humanelement should be eliminated from:
duction because it is-the potential source of “human error’ fits in wr
the idea of management control.
, However, while emphasizing the various class forces that shape tr
design and application of machine-tools, Noble failsto consider th
there-is also a gender dimension to these forces. This eculd have ‘
observed through the role of the state, capital and ‘unionsbut it is pa
ticularly evidentin his otherwise excellent account of the ideology a
culture of engineers. Engineering culture, withvits «fascination , viii
computers and the most automated techniques, is archetypical.
masculine and would have provided anrexcellent opportunity for an
integration of class and gender perspectives on technological chang "

  
         
  
   
 
     
  
    
   
   
   
    
  
   
   
   
   
  
  

skill is deValued and undead “
, ,e:is~',,a more direct sense, however, in which gender relations
heir. imprint, on technology. As I pointed out earlier, recent
,stwork has emphasized that distinctions of skill between
men’sand men’sworkhave as much to do with jobcontrol and
evels as they have to do with actual technique. However, this

The Gendered Relations of Technology

Class divisions have been central to the analysis presented so far, but
the relations between women workers and men workers are of
fundamental importance ‘ for , any discussion of the *1 development
of technology. One of theways-that genderdivisions interact with
technological change: is through the price of labour, in that women?s
wage labour generally costs considerably less than men’s. This may
affecttechnological change in at least two ways. Firstly, aswe have
seen, employers may seek :forms of technological change that enable
them to treplaceeexpensive‘ skilled male workers with low paid, less
unionized 'Ifemale: workers. Secondly, because a new. machine rhas::-to
pay ”for itself in labour costs saved, technological change may be
slower in industries where there is an abundant supply of cheap
women’s labour.

There is some historicalevidence that the rate of technical develop—
mentvhas depended, at least in part, on the price- and skill ﬂexibility
of the available labour force. For example, the clothing industry has »
remained technologically static since the nineteenth century with little
change in the sewing process. There tare no doubt purely technical 1
obstacles to the mechanization «of clothing production, such as; the i
ﬂoppy material involved and changing styles- and fashions. However, i
leaving aside the technical difﬁculties, there will be less incentive to

hurt-tools and machinery to match the technical skills they have
, ated. Machinery. 1s designedbymen withmen in mind; industrial
hnology reﬂects male power as well as capitalist domination.

ranslormaﬁon of Typesetting: Building in Sex- Bias

best exatnples of the gendering of technology come from
burn s (1983) :history of: typesetting, which provides a detailed
tion of the technological evolution of the computerized photh
position system.zLike» Noble, she shows that automation did not
. proceed in the way that it did. Rather, the form of automation
the result of ‘deliberate’ selection. Cockburn suggests that the
nical choices made can only be understood by looking closely at
conflictual relations of production, including the central role of
er relations.‘ ,

,puterized photocomposition technology has what is known as
WERTY keyboard. Q-W-E-R—T-Y are the characters on the
ad top row left-hand side of a conventional typewriter. This is
the standard keyboard incorporated into computers. However

