42 The Technology of Production

exploit the skill shortage in their area. Most of these male profes-
sionals were earning more working at home, and many pointed to the
lower overheads of running a business from home.

In our study we found that what they appreciated was not the :

opportunity to combine paid work with childcare but their flexible
and varied working patterns. In fact, the very long hours they worked
militated against any significant change to the balance between work
and leisure, or work and family life. When we asked the programmers
and word processor operators in our sample how working from home
had changed their attitude to work, we found strong evidence of rein-
forced rather than transformed gender differences. Whereas the
majority “ of men had become more work-centred, the women were
more likely to have become less work-centred and more family-centred.

Thus even research on new technology homework fails to reveal
simple trends. Electronic homework may well mean very different
things for professional and clerical workers, and for men and women.
For Women clerical workers, new technology homework still reﬂects
their labour market vulnerability — vulnerability that stems from the
availabilityof their skill and the domestic division of labour. It is only
for male professionals who possess skills which are in short supply
that new technology homework presents an unambiguously attractive
choice. But this hardly warrants the general enthusiasm for ‘electronic
cottages’ that characterizes so much of the literature about the future
of work. ‘

Overall, then, new forms of computer~based homework would
appear to reinforce sexual divisions in relation to paid work and
unpaid domestic work, as well as to the technical division of labour.
Once more we see women failing to gain the genuinely technical jobs,
in this case producing software for computers. It is a stark example

of the reproduction of women’s traditional position in the new elec—
tronic age. ’

The Social Shaping of Workplace Technology

In this chapter I have been examining the impact of technological
change on sexual divisions in the labour market and occupational
segregation between women and men. Although new technologies
may be important levers of change in the social relations of produc-
tion, the gendered character of work has inhibited major transforma-
tions in the sexual division of labour. In a period of vast technological
changes which have profoundly restructured work in every sphere, the

  
    
   
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
  

The Technology of Production 43

esilience of the gendered character of the technical division and
ierarchy of labour has been notable.
will now turn the focus round and consider the social factors that

ii der relations in the workplace themselves profoundly affect the
ection and pace of technological change. It is only through an
,alysis of the processes by which technology is itself gendered that
‘ inability to undermine gender divisions can be understood.

mations of existing technology. However this is not the only force
ping technology. Industrial innovation is a product of an histori—
3; specific activity carried out in the interests of particular social
ups and against the interestseof others.
echnological systems are oriented to a goal and that goal is nor-
any to reduce costs and increase revenues. When technologists focus
ntive effort on the ‘inefficient’ components of a system, for many
ctical purposes inefficient means uneconomical. So technological
easoning and economic reasoning are often inseparable.
‘ :vital issue in technical change is the cost of labour, because much
ovation is sponsored and justified on the ground that it saves
bout costs. In a capitalist society, class relations are a major factor
5fecting the price of labour. Placing the class dimension at the centre
s analysis, labour process theory is an important and well estab—
hed approach to the study of technological change. Although
united with respect to gender, it provides a useful starting point for
thedevelopment of a gender perspective.

e; mechanization of craft work has commonly been presented as the
model for understanding major changes in the capitalist labour pros
’ess. Historically, production was very dependent on the skills and
7 'owledge of craft workers, but over the first quarter of the twentieth
ntury their jobs were subdivided, allowing employers to dispense
h skilled labour. Rather than seeing deskilling as an inexorable
endency, recent studies have emphasized the extent to which worker
esistance mediated the deskilling process.8 Craft skills provided the
asis for maintaining control over the utilization of machinery and
, {ence the basis for worker organization. A key part of this strategy
7was the exclusion of other non—craft workers who offered a threat to

 

