  
   
     
 
   
 

34 The Technology of Production

average, paid about three-quarters of men’s hourly earnings. Wha
requires explanation is the contrast between the ﬂexibility of the to
taken, by occupational segregation by sex and its persistence.

It has been more common for women to enter new jobs requirinf
new skills than to break into traditional male preserves, as the examipl
of the insurance industry shows. Even the allocation of these co
pletely new jobs, where no gendered custom and practice has beet:
established, is ’a fundamentally gendered process. In new -
jobs, such as programming, women tend to be segregated in i.

tinuing rigid sex—typing of occupations.6

What role does technology play in the construction and reproduc-
tion of these gender relations, and in their potential transformation?-
New technologies do disrupt established patterns of sex-typing and

thereby open up-opportunities for changing the sexual division of

labour. As technologies develop and displace each other, there is a
disturbance among the technically skilled strata. Some gain and sbme
lose. Many male craft skills have been quite purposively made redun~
dant by new technology that has radically transformed the nature of
the work. But technology is not an independent force; the way in
which, it affects the nature of work is conditioned by existing rela-
tionships. There are conﬂicts and negotiations over technological
change and the opportunities for changing the sexual division of
labour to women’s advantage are often foreclosed by male power.
Women lose out in these struggles as powerful groups defend their old
skills or monopolize new ones. Craft workers, who have been seen as
the defenders of working-class interests in struggles over technical
change, in part derive their strength from their past exclusionary prac‘
tices. Their gains have often been made at the expense of less skilled
or less well-organized sections of the workforce, and this has in many
cases involved the exclusion of women.

The entry of women into industrial work in Britain, America and
Australia during the First and, especially, the Second World Wars was
followed by an equally deliberate process of their expulsion from that
work once the immediate crisis had passed (see figure 2.1). Thus the
gross under~representation of women in engineering and other indus-
trial work, and the lack of confidence often felt by women faced with
technology, are evidence of a deeper problem. Official plans to rectify
the under~representation of women in engineering often proceed as

The Technology of Production 35

  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  

Munitions worker during World War: II h
I, urce: Australian War Memorial, negative no. 13178. From t 81‘ r
film. For Love or Money (1983) by Megan McMurchy, Margot ive ,

Jenni Thornley

the problem were simply a lack of self—confidence 1n wonzleitt’. 13::
male dominance of technology has in large part been secure k y

ti e exclusion of women from areas of technological Em: . with
‘ «tinting and newspaper publishing in particular 15 an iln us gavel-
.aftgtraditions of labour process control. Recent techno orgica hich
ments, particularly in electronic typesetting technoljogies wisted
ave the potential to undermine those traditions, have fellas: and
by printing workers. Strikes and lockouts throughoutht e “admo—
early 19803 have characterized attempts to introducelt egﬁw tinting
logy in the United States, Great Britain andAustraia. f fhp sexual
industry in Britain provides a contemporary illustration 0 e

' ' ' ‘ technology.
‘ olitics involved in such struggles over
13[The violent dispute at the new technology newspaper plant at

  

