6 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

philosophical tradition is beyond the scope of this book.3 My con-

cern is with the way dualistic gender metaphors such as those used

above reveal the underlying social meanings in purportedly value-
neutral scientific thought.

There has been a growing awareness of the use of female metaphors
for nature and naturalmetaphors for women. An examination of the
texts of science highlights the correspondence between the way men
treated women in particular historical periods and the way they used
nature. Some feminist historians have focused on the rape and torture
metaphors inthe writings of Sir Francis Bacon and the other fathers
of modern scrence. Merchant (1980) argues that during the fifteenth
to seventeenth centuries in Europe both nature and scientific inquiry
were conceptualized in ways modelled on men’s most violent and
misogynous relationships to women and this modelling has contri—
buted to the distinctive gender symbolism of the subsequent scientific
world view.

Eighteenth and nineteenth century biomedical science in France and
‘Britain deployed similar gender symbolism to conceptualize nature:
. . scrence and medicine as activities were associated with sexual
metaphors which were clearly expressed in designating nature as a
woman to be unveiled, unclothed and penetrated by masculine science’
(J ordanova, 1980, p. 45). Anatomically, males were depicted as repre-
senting active agents and females as passive objects of male agency.
‘From' her study Jordanova concludes that biomedical science
intensified the cultural association of nature with passive, objectified
femininity and of culture with active, objectifying masculinity. This
strikingly gendered imagery of nature and of scientific inquiry is not
just an historical relic, as these same dichotomies and metaphors can
be found in contemporary writing on science. As Harding asks, is it
any wonder that women are not an enthusiastic audience for these
interpretations?

. Rather than pointing to the negative consequences of women’s iden-
tification with the natural realm, some feminists celebrate the iden—
tification of woman and nature. This finds political expression in the
coo—feminism of the eighties which suggests that women must and will
liberate the earth because they are more in tune with nature. For them
women’s involvement in the ecology and peace movements was evi:
dence of this special bond. As Susan Griffin expressed it: ‘those of
us who are born female are often less severely alienated from nature
than are most men’ (1983, p. 1). Women’s biological capacity for
motherhood was seen as connected to an innate selflessness born of
their responsibility for ensuring the continuity of life. Nurturing and

  
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology 7

caring instincts are essential to the fulfilment of this responsibility.
nversely, men’s inability to give birth has made them disrespectful
human and natural life, resulting in wars and ecological disasters.
mthis perspective, a new feminist science would embrace feminine
tuition and subjectivity and end the ruthless exploitation of natural
sources. Rejecting patriarchal science, this vision celebrates female
alues as virtues and endorses the close relationship between women’s
,ies, women’s culture and the natural order.

,While eco-feminism sees women’s values as having a biological
asis, another approach to the question of women and science has
been informed by psychoanalysis. The object~relations school of
hought has been particularly influential in the feminist concep-
étualizations of science. This theory describes the mechanisms through
which adult women and men come to model themselves and their
relation to the world in different ways. To acquire his masculine
identity the boy must both might and deny his former dependencies,
attachment and identification with the mother. The resulting conflicts
in men over masculinity create a psychology of male dominance.

Using this theory Keller argues that girls and boys have different
cognitive skills. As the male distinguishes himself from the mother,
he also learns to differentiate sharply between subject and object,
between himself and others. According to Keller, as scientists are men
this male mind set, obsessed with detachment and mastery, has been
written into the norms and methods of modern science. A radically
different scientific method is described by Keller (1983) in her inﬂuen—
tial biography of Barbara McClintock. A Nobel prize-winning
geneticist, McClintock is described as a scientist who merged subject
and object in her ‘feeling for the organism’ and whose work was
imbued with a holistic understanding of, and reverence for, nature.
According to Keller, this woman’s work provides us with ‘a glimpse
of what a gender-free science might look like’ by combining masculine
and feminine characteristics. Rather than celebrating a woman-
centred science as do the eco—feminists, this project insists on the
possibility of a gender-neutral science produced by androgynous
individuals.‘

While emphatically rejecting the possibility of a neutral objective
science, other feminist writers have shared a concern with the exclu-
sion of woman-centred values from science. However, they attribute
such values not to the individual psyche but to a socially and histori-
cally constructed gender division of labour. They trace the way in
which, as the spheres of public and private life became increasingly
separated during the course of the eighteenth century, women became

 

