82 Domestic Technology Domestic Technology 83

  
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
  
 
  
    
  
   
   
   
 
  
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
   
   
  
   
  
    
   
  
 
 
  

tribution of time between individual tasks. Her surprising conclu
that the introduction of domestic technology had practically no e
on the aggregate time spent onhousework,soon became then
doxy amongst feminists working in the'area. ' i
In recent years feminist scholars in North America,,Brita'
Australia have produced excellent material on the history cf ,
work and domestic technology.‘ Considerable attention has
devoted to countering the myth that housework is the creatio
discontented housewives in that it ‘expands to fill the time availa
Feminists, (commonly quoting Vanek’s data)_have emphasized,
women’s household tasks have not decreased with so~called .‘lah
saving’ appliances; Much of :this literature has pointedto the-co-
dictions inherent in attempts to mechanize the home and stander
domestic production. Such attempts havefoundered‘on the natur
houseWork ‘ privatized, decentralized and labour-intensive. Th
’ in th _ words of one writer on the subject, ‘substantial change

rial-ﬁxation of the Home and Creation of the
”ﬁe ’

ethe relationship between the technological developments in
’my’and those in the home? To what extent did new techno~
dustrialize’ the home and transform domestic labour? Why,
W ssivevtechnological changes in the home, such as running
gasiandielectric cookers, central heating, washing machines,
I ors,’védo studies showthat household work in the indus-
countéries still‘r’accounts for approximately half of the total
timeé=i+(Sirageldin, 1969)?
onventional wisdom is that the forces of technological change
: rowth of the market economy have progressively absorbed
the household’s‘roles’fingpgoduction. Theclassic formulation
position isrtocbe found‘in Talcott Parsons’ (1956) functionalist
gyi of'the family. He, argues that industrialization removed
functionsi’from‘ the family system, until all that remains is
ti‘onnFor ParSons, the wife - mother function is the primary
mation of children and the stabilization of the adult personality;
becomes mainly expressive or psychological, as compared wrth
n’strurrrental’ male world _of'=‘real’ work. More generally, modern
elegy-is seen ashaving either eliminated or made less arduous
Stall women’s former, household'work, thus freemg women to
i he labour force. To most commentators, the history of house—
s:>the storyof its elimination.
ough» it is true that industrialization transformed households, the
changes invthe pattern of household work during this period were
use that-:thetraditional model predicts. Ruth Schwartz Cowan
inher celebrated American study of the development of house-
echnology between 1860 and 1960, argued exactly that} For
theyiew that the household has passed from being a unit of
oduction to a unit of consumption, with the attendant assumption
I, Ewomen have nothingrleft to do at home, is grossly misleading.
er, the processes by which the American home became indus—
edwere much more complex and heterogeneous than this.
owan provides the following explanations for the failure of the
dustrial’“ revolution in the «home’ to ease or eliminate household
5‘. Mechanization gave rise to a whole range of new tasks which,
hough not as physically demanding, were as time consuming as the
obs‘they had replaced. The loss of servants meant that even middle—
class housewives had to do all the housework themselves. Further,

 

 

 

 

household technology left the sex, hours, efficiency, and status 0
household worker essentially unaltered’ (MCGaw, 1982, p. 8
Illuminatingas-these historical works are, few of, them have exam

 

of economic imperatives or individual choice. Neither have they quit
tinned-whether women welcomed or resisted these innovations;

analysed from a different? perspective, by ‘post-industrial soc
theorists (Gershuny, 1983, 1985; Toffler, 1980), whose concern abo
‘de‘industrialization’ has led some to see the householdreplacing
factory as the centre of social and economic life. Typically, they
technologicalchange asthe major cause of shifts in the provision

nomy. As I shall demonstrate, argumentsbased on technologi-
determinism play a centralrole in both this and feminist streams;
thought. 3 4’

This chapter begins by looking at feminist material on t
mechanization of housework and then considers the work of post?
industrialists on the impact of technological innovation in the horn,
By way of challenge to these latter theorists, I go on to examine‘som,
alternative, approaches to individualized housework. In the last
section I look at some of the key factors operating in the design
process of specific household appliances. My aim is to explore the way
the design and promotion of domestic technologies have been shaped
by existing ideologies of gender.

 

