 
   
  

346 Technology as Masculine Culture Technology as Masculine Culture M7

  

are referred to by the female pronoun! Similarly, the compl
values of hard/ soft are also used to legitimate female exclusio
the world of engineering!‘ Masculinity is expressed bothri
muscular physical strength and aggression, and in terms of'an
power. ‘At one moment, in order to fortify their identifii
physical engineering, men dismiss the intellectual worldsas
the next moment, however, they need to appropriate 'gised‘
intellectual engineering work for masculinity too.’ (Cockbur
p. 190) ~

No matter how masculinity is defined according to,
adaptable ideology, it always constructs women as ill-suited
logical pursuits.

we pom— ow NASTY, Roam GAMES

"‘mm sous-we PWINTEUECM STUFF
’ scour wmmNo narrates
,. 4% “NRA“: “-v‘

423’ \ Z

  
    

       
      
    
  

  
 
 
   
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
   

Combat. the Heroic and Masculinity

We have been considering examples of the sense of maste-
technology and its connection with masculinity. If ther,
institution in society that underwrites the ideology of :heg"
masculinity, it is the military. Contemporary Western so
suffused with popular images of men as enthusiastic killers
Rambo-style fashions, war films, military toys and mag
Weapons and particularly guns are the epitome of mastery assai
of domination. Guns are intrinsically associated with dea
danger. Here the sense of mastery is enhanced by the closen,
physical danger, it is seen as the pinnacle of manly daring. Thee
ness of men to die — for their country, for their womenfolk, fo
honour, is central to both military and manly, values. Warpr
the ultimate test of manliness and is the legitimateexpressiongo ,
violence. In this sense, the armed forces represent anddefen
masculine ethic. Warrior values as expressed in armed combat
central to military mythology, which in turn is imbued with, gen
ideology.9 Both war and weaponry are seen as exclusively male
cerns, and the imagery surrounding them simultaneously port
men as the brave warriors and women as the helpless wives-moth
daughters, whose lives and honour the soldiers are fighting to prot:

Ideas about femininity and the unsuitability of women fortzé
military are almost universal. At the core of all arguments again
allowing women to perform combat roles are beliefs about; I
inferiority of the female body. Now that women are increasingly‘be g
recruited into the military, this search for sexual difference has
anything, intensified. ‘Western armed forces now conduct officral’
studies of pregnancy, menstruation, and “upper body strength” infan

source.- Sophie Grillet

ost desperate search for some fundamental, intrinsic (i.e. not open
political debate) difference between male and female soldiers.
oe, 1983, p. 138) According to military logic, combat involves
ng and carrying heavy things and pulling oneself over formidable
acles. In a mirror image of non—military workplace ideology,
stimptions about women’s physical weakness and higher absen-
s’m‘ are mobilized to exclude women from combat. As Cynthia
’ Aloe comments, the distinctions between ‘combat’ and ‘non-combat’,
ront’ and the ‘rear’, which ultimately justify the military’s sexual
sion of labour, are increasingly difficult to sustain in the face of
odern warfare.

It was never easy however. Enloe (1983, p. 123) provides a wonder—
'-l illustration of the delicate manoeuvres that have been performed
maintain a male definition of combat. During the Second Workd-
;ar several anti-aircraft batteries were set up in Britain comprismgir
en and women. The idea was that women could operate the :gunsi-g:
rescontrol instruments and so ‘free’ male soldiers to actually fireatlr’e
guns. Thus, in the new mixed artillery crews women were assigned,
‘ to control, searchlight operations, targeting and hit confirmatio’
hese artillery women were defined as ‘non~combat’ personnelgzwhile
emen standing next to them, but assigned to firing the guns,

designated as ‘combat’ personnel! . . ,
The view that women are constitutionally predisposed towards

 

 
      
  
  
    
   
  
    
  
   
    
   

 

     

 

 

     
   
  

 

 

 

