74 Reproductive Technology
Reproductive Technology 75

  
 
  
  
  
   
    
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
   
  
    
   
   
  
   
 
  
 
  
   
   
 
  
 
  

hath-control technology came to us with modern medicine. This is far
Iii-the truth, as modern medicine did almost nothing, until the last
shanty years, to improve on birth control devices that were literally
jre than a millennium old’ (Gordon, 1977, p. 25). In fact, most of

‘ present methods have had precursors in societies far less techno-
‘7 ally sophisticated than ours. There is evidence from old medical
and from anthropological studies that women have almost uni-
ally sought to control their fertility. Far from being invented by
entists or doctors, effective forms of birth control were devised and
_ tnistered by women in nearly all ancient societies.

Reproductive knowledge and practice has always been part of
en’s folklore and culture. The relatively recent establishment of
' ale hegemony in medicine has obscured the existence of earlier
[hods that were more under women’s control. Traditionally, know-
about: techniques forzbietigcontrol, like remedies for other com-
"ms, was developed and praCtised by wisewomen and midwives and
sled down from generation to generation. A wide array of birth-
{trol techniques were practised in the ancient world and in modern
industrial societies including magic, herbal potions, infanticide,
ortion,coitus interruptus, vaginal sponges, douches, and pessaries.
Not only did these techniques vary in their effectiveness, but they
very different implications for sexual relations. Some techniques
more amenable than others tobeing used independently and even
-etly by women; some give full control to men; others are more
ely to be usedco~operatively. The point that needs to be emphasized
that women and men might have conﬂicting concerns and goals in
rid :when contemplating fertility control and these are reﬂected in
ifferent techniques available. We will return to this point later.
Gordon argues that-it is only by looking at this heritage of birth
'trol customs. that we can comprehend the emergence of the birth
trolmovement, for that movement took its strength from women’s
derstanding that traditional methods of fertility control were being
pressed. In particular, while abortion had hitherto been the subject
moralcontroversy, it was not until the nineteenth century that it
ctually criminalized. These abortion laws were intended to elimi«
e doctors? rivals such as midwives and to undermine traditional
ms of reproductive control. The result of the medical and legal
ervention in this crucial form of birth control was a decline in
'cmen’s ability to effectively limit their pregnancies. What was new
henineteenth century, then, was not the technology to control fer-
y but the emergence of a political movement that campaigned for

he right to use contraception.

societies women were the victims of their own fecundity.l3 There
a tendency to look back from our current ‘Pill Era’ and regard birt
control as a nineteenth—century invention, representing the triumph»
the progressive forces of technology over ignorance and prejudic
The Pill, a technical invention, is credited with enabling women fo

the first time to control their fertility, and the massive social chang

 

the form it takes, is as much dependent on a society’s attitude to sex
children and the status of women, as it is on effective technology ‘Fo
the use of birth control requires a morality that permits the separatio
of sexual Intercourse from procreation, and is related to the exten
to which women are valued for roles other than those of wife and
mother’ (Greenwood and King, 1981, p. 169).” Birth control ha
alwaysbeen a matter of social and political acceptability rather than
of medtcrne and technology. Like childbirth, its prevention has always
been subject to elaborate regulation and ritual.
In her book on birth control in America, Linda Gordon (1977:)
argues that social institutions and cultural values, rather than medical
or technical considerations, have shaped modern contraceptive tech—
nology. Like most feminists, Gordon began with the premise that
birth control represented the single most important contribution to
the material basis of women’s emancipation in the last century. How
ever, she was quickly led to ask why the technology of contraception,
developed when it did, and why, in our generation, the invention of
the Pill IS seen as the key to liberation. For her, birth control was as
much symptom as cause of larger social changes in the relations
between the sexes and in the economic organization of society. I
The ability to transcend biology was present in the earliest known
socretres. ‘There is a prevalent myth, in our technological society, that

 

 

