Preface

Over the last two decades feminists have identified men’s monopoly
of technology as an important source of their power; women’s lack
of technological skills as an important element in our dependence on
men. From Women in Manual Trades, set up in the early 19703 to
train women in traditionally male skills, to the Women and Com—
puting courses of the 19805, feminist groups and campaigns have
attempted to break men’s grip on technical expertise and to win greater
autonomy and technical competence for women. In the same period,
women’sefforts to control their own fertility have extended from
abortion and contraception to mobilizing around the new reproduc-
tive technologies. With dramatic advances in biotechnology and the
prospect of genetic engineering, women’s bodies have in some respects
become increasingly vulnerable to exploitation.

These and other political struggles around technology, and the dif—
ficulties they continue to confront, have opened up an exciting new
field in feminist scholarship. To date however, most contributions
to the debate on gender and technology have been of a somewhat
specialist character, focused on a particular type of technology. This
book represents an attempt at a more coherent approach, bringing
together under one theoretical framework a number of different sites
of technology. It is my intention both to explicate and to extend the
newly emerging feminist analysis.

Turning to social science debates about technology we find a pre—
occupation with the impact of technological change on society. Many
commentators, for example, claim we are in the midst of a microelec~
tronic revolution, which will cause a radically new form of society
to emerge Regardless of their theoretical or political perspectives,
women rarely enter their field of vision. Feminists have worked to put
women and gender relations back into this frame, highlighting the
differential effects of technological change on women and men.
Although still largely concerned with ‘effects’, feminists also point
beyond the relations of paid production to a recognition that

 

Preface ix

technology impinges on every aspect of our public and private lives.
While I will be engaging with these issues, I also intend to take the
analysis into less charted waters.

The technological determinism implicit in much of both the
sociological and feminist literature on the impact of technology has
recently been subjected to criticism. The new sociology of technology
has turned the focus around to examine the social factors that shape
technological changes. Rather than only looking at the effects of tech
nology on society, it also looks at the effects of society on technology.

The Social Shaping of Technology (1985), which I co—edited with
Donald MacKenzie, was part of this project. As an edited collection,
that book was to some extent deficient in its treatment of gender
issues, reflecting the state of knowledge at thattime. This book is
motivated by a desire to redress the balance, exploring in more depth
women’s relationship to and experience of technology. Rather than
providing a comprehensive revrew of the now burgeoning literature
in this area, I have selected research which can best exemplify the cen—
trality of gender relations to the social shaping approach.

I have not attempted to encompass here all forms of technology.
I have not, for example, dealt with the technologies of surveillance
and political control, nor with energy technology. Various aspects
of information and communication technologies have also been
excluded. I have chosen to cOncentrate on advanced industrial
societies, and the book has few references to the major issues con-
cerning technology in the Third World. There is now an extensive
literature on how technology transfer to the Third World has a power—
ful tendency to reinforce male dominance.l In the end, the sheer
scope of the topic prohibited its inclusion.

The book begins with an overview of feminist theories of science
and technology. In this first chapter, I argue that the feminist critique
of science cannot simply be translated into a feminist perspective on
technology. Although useful parallels can be drawn, technology needs
to be understood as more than applied science. The following chapters
have a less abstract focus and are organized around substantive areas
of technology. Each chapter begins by looking at the impact of tech—
nological change on sexual divisions and goes on to develop the argu—
ment that technology itself is gendered.2

Chapter 2 assesses the impact of production technologies on sexual
divisions in the sphere of paid work. It then looks at the extent to
which these divisions, and gender relations in the workplace, them—
selves profoundly affect the direction and pace of technological

change.

