  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
   
  
 
 
 
  
    
  
   
   
  
  
   
    
  
    
  
   
   
    
   
   
 
    
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 

The Built Environment lll

mmodity and central to the generation of capitalist profits. It is
ecently that the structure and shape of the house itself has been
,ected to feminist analysis. ,,

physical form of buildings is usually taken to be the inevitable
it i: technological andengineering advances, for example, con-
and steel gave us the high-rise tower block of modernist archi—
e. Changes in the interior design of dwellings are likewise
ned in terms of mechanical innovations. A classic example can
und in explanations of the changing location of the kitchen,
eh s oftenattributed to the invention of the Rumford stove. This
ined stove for cooking and heating eliminated odour and
ion and issaid to be thus responsible, for the movement of the
nsvfrom thebasement or rear of the house to its centre.‘
rtainlyrinnovations inbuilding materials, engineering methods
omestictechnologies are of major importance and make possible
,evelopment of new architectnral forms. However, as with other
ologies, the design of the built environment is stamped with
' ocialand economic relations. Historians of architecture pro-
manyiinstances :of physical-structures and arrangements that
crate explicit or implicit‘political purposes. One such example
ide’Parisian boulevard designed «by Baron Haussmann to per-
, movement of troops andgthus prevent any recurrence of street
ngrof'the kind that" took pletceduring the revolution of 1848.
el;» Foucault’s discussion .,of<r:~,:Bentham’s Panopticon, an all-
architectural :forrnadesigned to keep prisoners under constant
ilancegis a vivid illustration of how a building can itself embody
ues of Control. Prisonsthough are not the only buildings that
designed to institutionalize patterns of power and order. The
BM headquarters in, Sydney is curiously reminiscent of the
,ticonslts open—plan offices and clear glass internal walls are
edsto give the appearance of :a “status—free environment’.
rehicsiseem to be dissolved where even managers’ offices have
wallsrand are located close to their staff. In fact of course, what
arrangements achieve is the possibility for increased surveillance
,tavhormust feel watched even when they are not. In this sense,
asszitself does the looking. Like the Panopticon, then, the
are of the “building ensures that control is largely achieved
h? self-discipline.

st domesticarchitecture may not provide us with such stark
spiessof the extent to which buildings incorporate techniques of
, control, that women are constrained in particular ways by the
"or the family dwelling is certain. The house both symbolizes

 

5

The Built Environment:
Women's Place.» Gendered
Space '

Whether the private home is a free-standing house in Frank Lloy
Wright’s Broadacre City mm high tower flat in Le Corbusier’s Radia ‘
City, domestic work-has been treated as a private, sex-stereotype,
activity, and most architects continue to design domestic work spaces
isolated female workers. Hayden, The Grand Domestic Revolutio‘

In every culture and historical epoch, domestic, architect
uniquely revealing about prevailing social relations and norms
household organization. The design of houses is imbued with val
and ideas that both reflect and exert tremendous influence ove
patterns and quality of our lives. In this chapter I want to bro
the discussion of household technology to include the house
technological construct, and the built environment more gener
The built environment is taken to mean ‘. . . our created surro
ings, including homes, their arrangement in relation to one ano
to public spaces, transport routes, workplaces and the layout of c”
(Matrix, 1984, p. I)

In what follows, I will be arguing that the built environment rd!
and reinforces a domestic ideal which emphasizes the importan
the home as a woman’s place and a man’s haven. Sexual division
literally built into houses and indeed the whole structure of the u
system. Architecture and urban planning have orchestrated
separation between women and men, private and public, home
paid employment, consumption and production, reproduction
production, suburb and city. While people do not actually live ac
ing to these dichotomies, the widespread belief in them does influ
decisions and have an impact on women’s lives.

The focus of much feminist literature has been houseworkan
implications of technological developments within the home. .
war sociology has chieﬂy considered housing as an aspect 0,
distribution and transmission of social wealth and privilege, that
as an aspect of social stratification. At an economic level, housin

