l58 Technology as Masculine Culture

striking resemblance to the differences discussed by
Walkerdme (1989) in the cognitive styles expected of andenc
in, boys and girls by teachers in the primary school. inert ’
the computer has become socially constructed as a mall:
children learn from an early age to associate computers with?" I
men. This means that girls approach the computer less often:

indicates a fundamental difference in capacity. Rather, suché
pancres in cognitive style as can be observed are the conseque ‘
major sexual inequalities in power.

work as trained mathematicians to calculate firing tables by than
rockets and artillery shells. When ENIAC (Electronic Numeri
integrator and Calculator), the first operational computer was A
in the United States in the early forties, these women were ass’rg
to programme it and became known as the ‘ENIAC girls’ (Kraft?e
p. lfll). It was because programming was initially viewed aszthdi
clerical work of low status that it was assigned to women A
complex skills and value of programming were increasingly rec
‘nized’, it came to be considered creative, intellectual and demandm
men s work’. Thus, depending on the circumstances different co"
tive styles may be characterized as ‘masculine’ or ‘feminine’ accorcfin
to the power and status that attaches. ‘ I

Throughout this book I have been arguing that technology is me

than a set of artefacts. Technology is also a cultural product which;
Is istoncally constituted by certain sorts of knowledge and social:
practices as well as other forms of representation. Conceiving of?

technology as a culture reveals the extent to which an affinity with
technology has been and is integral to the constitution of male gender
identity. Masculinity and femininity are produced in relation to each
other and what is masculine, according to the ideology of sexual
difference, must be the negation of the feminine. Different childhood:
exposure to technology, the prevalence of different role models,

 
 
 
   
    
  
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
    
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  

traction of masculinity is a comp
nolithic masculinity and not all men are compe

 

Technology as Masculine Culture l59

erent forms of schooling, and the extreme segregation of the

rmarket all lead to what Cockburn describes as ‘the construction
It as strong, manually able and technologically endowed, and
has physically and techniCally incompetent’ (1983, p. 203).

nder is not just about difference but about power: this technical
ise is a source of men’s actual or potential power over women.
. c an important part of women’s experience of being less than,
ependent on, men. However, it should be remembered that the
lex process. There is not one
tent with techno—

 

:Rather, technical competence is central to the dominant cultural

of masculinity, and its absence a key feature of stereotyped

ininity.
gher essential nor immutable, and therefore the potential exists for

, transformation. -, , .

The correspondence between men and machines is thus

see Dorothy Dinnerstein’s (1976) analysis of men’s war—

For example,
sire to appropriate from women the

making activities in terms of their dc
power of giving life and death.

. Willis (1977') and Cockburn (I983) contain excellent discussions of

masculinity in the industrial workplace.

' Maureen McNeil (1987, p. 194) makes this point in a review of Cynthia
'Cockburn’s (1985) book.

See Pam Linn’s (1985) interesting article on microcomputers in education

which makes these points in relation to Turkle’s study.
See chapter 3 where I discussed the historical variability of the gendering

of jobs. See P. Kraft (1977 )and J. Greenbaum (1979) on the history of
xcellent illustration of this. Over time,

computing which provides an e
jobs that were ﬁrmly characterized as suitable for men become feminized

and ‘women’s work’ becomes men’s.
Although this is the case in most Western countries, the proportion of

women engineers in Eastern Europe is significantly higher.

It should be noted that there are also distinct national cultures of engi-
neering. In a recent article, Eda Kranakis (1989) contrastsFren‘chrand.
American attitudes towards manual labour throughoutrthe nineteenth
century. Whereas machine builders and mechanical engineers instance
bore a certain social stigma, this was not the casetintgthegljnith " ,:

In fact, the locomotive driver, Casey Jones, wasportrayed‘ ‘

romantic figure in American folk culture. AlthoughtsKrana tsdoesnot
‘fferences must, informrstereotypesrof

 

 

touch on gender, such national d1
masculinity.

 

 

