    
     
 

46 The Technology of Production The Technology of Production 47

table,» , was numerical control developed and record—playback
ed? :It was the post-war period of labour militancy that provided
alcontext in which the technology of machine tool automation
,eloped.

ordsplayback was a system that would have extended the
ists:’;skill.Although the machines were more automated under
ystem,»the machinists still had control of the feeds, speeds,
er of cuts and output of metal; in other words, they controlled
achineand thereby retained shop floor control over production.
tactical control on the other hand offered a means of dispensing
ese well-organized skilled machinists. The planning and con-
:qunct-ions. were now carried out in an office because the
eszoperated according to computer programs. The machinist
.. .azbutton pusher. Numerical control was therefore a manage—
.stem, as well asgaigatech elegy-for cutting metals. It led to
r'zational- changes inith factory which increased managerial
ulover production because the technology was chosen, in part,
st that purpose.

would be wrong to assume that managers’ goals in preferring
ierical control to record—playback were necessarily realized. The
action of numerical control on to the shop floor did not simply
barrel to management. Itsewas met with fierce resistance from
:kforce. At thesame time, management found that it needed
stain skilledmachinists to operate the new machines effectively. »
sequently,:management was never able to gain complete control
production. In reality, machines do not run themselves and
efore the tendency to deskilling is always contradictory. Indeed,
obles himself acknowledges, the subsequent development of
neztooltechnology has made it technically feasible and poten~
economical to institute shop floor programming. As techno-
advances opened up new areas of application —- in smaller
involved in small batch or specialised production — it also
ovided opportunities for craft workers to regain control over pro-
mming. In fact, the operational requirements of these small firms
.gbemore compatible with shop floor programming than with a
gerial strategy oriented around deskilling.

chiefs study-is remarkable for its attempt to encompass many dif-
tzlevels of social determination of the technology. It does not
mply rely on treating technology as being determined by manage-
tis demand forecntrol over workers. It goes beyond that to
elude the role and interests of the military in that post—war period,
as well as the ideology and interests of engineers. Although it was the

(Wilkinson, 1983). Shoroterm competitive pressures between capitals
or motivational and ﬂexibility concerns clearly lead to compromises

   
 
  
 
 
    
 
    
 
  
 
   
  
 
   
  
   
  
   
   
  
 
   
   
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
  

tragically becoming obsolete. Skilled machinists, however, have nev

been typicalof workers-and certainlywomen workers do not figu ,
in their number. As there is little empirical analysis of technological,
dev’elopmentwhich explicitly'challenges technological determinism, ‘
is worth considering this example of a thentieth-century technology
to see if lessons can be drawn from it for a gender analysis. V

The Automation of Machine'TooIs: A Case Study of Choice

The evolution of automatically controlled machine tools is the subject
of a detailed study of the design, development and diffusion of a par .,
ticular technology, ‘from the point of: conception in the minds of
inventors to the point of production on the shop floor’ (Noble, 1984,
p.‘xiv). This is a particularly daunting taskto undertake fora modern?
technology when the ‘heroic inventor’ has left the stage to be replaced
by major institutions. ‘

' The central argument of David Noble’s classic study, Forces of Pro; '
duction, is that patterns of powerand cultural values shapeth’e actual '
processes of technological development. Noble argues that the con;
cepts of ‘economic viability’ and ‘technical viability’, whiCh- are often
used to explain technological change, are inherently political. ByIWay
of a-rdetailed reconstruction of a lost alternative to numerical‘control,
and by examination of variant forms of numerical controlthat have
also vanished, Noble shows that automation did not have to proceed
in the way it‘did. Rather, the form of 5 automation was the result of
deliberate selection.

'A major goal of machine tool automation was to secure managerial
control, by shifting control from the shop floor to the centralized
office. There were at least two possible solutions to the problem of
automating machine tools. Machining was in fact automated using the
technique of numerical control. But there was also a‘technique of
automation called ‘record-playback’ which was as promising as
numerical control yet it enjoyed only a brief existence. Why, asks

 

 

