 

   
     
   
   
  
   
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
 
   
   
   
   
   
  
  
   
   
  
 
   
  
  
 
    

l04 Domestic Technology
Domestic Technology 105

usedrvacuum cleaners have been given loud motors to impress peo
With‘ their power. Far from being designed to accomplish a sp
task, some appliances rare-designed expressly for sale as mode,
priced gifts from husband to wife and in fact are rarely used in)
ways the inequalities between women and men, and the subordin
of theiprivate to thepublic sphere are reflected in the very dc
processes. of domestic technology. I

In tracmg the history of various domestic appliances Fortyfl
shows how manufacturershave designed their products to rep;
prevailing ideologies ofshygieneand housework. Thus, inthe ,1
and: 19405 manufacturers styled appliances in forms reminiscen
factory or industrial equipment to emphasize the labourtsa’vin
crency which they claimed fortheir products. At that timeerdom'

main use of the residential telephone, the telephone industry
tedssuch uses until the 19208, condemning this use of the techno-
ori‘triviai: gossip". Until that time the telephone was sold as a
calzbusiness and household tool. ~When the promoters of the
honeefinally» began to advertise its use for sociability, this was at
partlyrin response to subscribers’ insistent and innovative uses
technology for personal conversation.
cher explains this time lag in the industry’s attitude toward
ility» in terms of the cultural ~‘mind-set’ of the telephone men.
ople who'developed, built, andvmarketed telephone systems
redominantly telegraph men. They therefore assumed that the
ne’s main useiwouldibe to directly replicate that: of the parent
‘iogygx-thetelegraph. in this context,people in the industry
ably considered telephone ‘visiting’ to be an abuse or triviali-
f‘thel service? no fit with their understandings of what

hnology was supp s be :used for.

ye issue. I iSociability wasalso tied up, with gender. It was women
articular who were attracted to, the telephone to reduce their
liness and isolation: and to free their time from unnecessary travel.
Tawzéindustryimen criticized ‘frivolous’r conversation on the tele—
n’e, they: almost always referred to the speaker as ‘she’. A 19305
eyérfoundzthat ‘whereasivsrnen armainly wanted a telephone for
nessrzreasons, women ranked talking to kin and friends first
cher; :1988, p. 51). _ , ' ' ‘
‘ en’s-relationship to the telephone is still different to men’s in
_ emenzuse the telephone more because of their confinement at
twithsmall children, because they have the responsibility for
aintainingvfamily and social relationsand possibly because of their
' Eofzcriimein the streets (Rakow, «1988). A recent Australian survey
minded that, fongoing telephone communication between female
« ‘lyimernbers constitutesanimportant part of their support strum
iandcontributes significantly to their sense of well‘being,seeurity; , _ ; ,
fbility,‘and:self-esteem’ (Moyal, 1989, p. 12). The telephone as , '
creased women’s access to each other and the outside‘world.vin . ,
aythetelephone may well have improved the quality of » worn
me lives more than many other domestic technologies.“ .

 

    
 

 

t—n

 

 

actually working in: factories, the physical appearance of applia?
changed. A: newkind of aesthetictfor domestic appliances emer
whichwas-discreet, smooth, and with the-untidy,'mechanicalzw
ings ofstheimachine covered‘from view in grey or white bores l
nowistandard domestic style of domesticappliances ‘. . . suited

deserts and contradictions of = housework well, ~ for their appearan
raised :«no comparisons: with machine tools or office equipment W
preserved the, illusion that» housework was an elevated-sand no

activrtyi, of: housework not being work (Forty;~l‘936, p.219). , , L

in the home. A‘crucial point isrthat the relationship ’betweentechn
logical and metal change is fundamentally indeterminate s I,
designers and promoters of a technology cannot completely predi
or. control itsifinal uses. Technology may well lead a ‘double life’ ‘ '
one whichrconforms to theintentions of'designers and interests
power andanother which contradicts them ~~proceeding behind 3
backs of their architects to yield unintended consequences and: math
(spa-ted possibilities’(Noble, 1984, p. 32.5).

A good illustration of how this doublelife might operate and the
women can actively subvert theoriginal purposes of a techhology I,
provrded by the diffusion of theteiephone; In a study of the American ’
history of the telephone, Claude Fischer (1988)wishowsthatthereiwas
a generation-long mismatch between how the consumers used the
telephone and how the industry men thought it should be : used L
Although sacrability (phoning relatives and friends) was and stillis

 

 

         
     
  

 
   

 

    
    
 

nclusion: More Work for SocinlScie I, I J

    
 

