lO Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

argue that there is no behaviour or meaning which is universally and
cross~cu1turally associated with either masculinity or femininity.
What is considered masculine in some societies is considered feminine
or gender-neutral in others and vice versa. Indeed, they suggest that
even where the nature/culture dichotomy exists, we must not assume
that the Western terms ,‘nature’ and ‘culture’ are adequate or reason-
able translations of the categories other cultures perceive. The histori—
cal research by Merchant and Jordanova referred to above also points
to the historical specificity of these gender metaphors. As Harding
says: ‘the effect of these studies is to challenge the universality of the
particular dichotomized set of social behaviors and meanings asso-
ciated with masculinity and femininity in Western culture’ (Harding,
1986, p. 129).

If we look at other cultures such as those of African and Aboriginal
peoples, we find concepts of nature quite different from dominant
European ones. Their world views posit a more harmonious rela-
tionship between mankind and the living universe of nature which
strikingly parallels what is claimed to be a distinctively feminine world
view. And what the African and Aboriginal world views designate as
European is similar to what feminists designate as masculine. Even
within the traditions of Western philosophy there are schools of
thought which claim these values for themselves. Karl Mannheim
(1953) describes romantic—conservatism as an anti-atomistic style of
thinking which advocates holism, organic unity, and the qualitative
rather than the quantitative as the preferred style of thought. Once
more it is difficult to claim that a holistic approach in harmony with
nature is specific to gender.

These arguments cast serious doubt on the projects for a feminist
science presented above. Once it is recognized that ‘masculinity’ and
‘femininity’, as well as the idea of ‘nature’, are changing cultural cate-
gories then it no longer makes sense to base a science on feminine
intuition rooted in nature. Authors like Keller, Rose and Hartsock
also call for a science which incorporates women’s values, although
they expressly dissociate themselves from this radical feminist essen-
tialism. Harding groups these authors under the label of the ‘feminist
standpoint epistemology’. This proposal argues that ‘men’s domi~
nating position in social life results in partial and perverse understand-
ings, whereas'women’s subjugated position provides the possibility of
more complete and less perverse understandings’ (Harding, 1986,
p. 26). These feminist critiques of science ground a distinctive feminist
science in the universal features of women’s experience. Nevertheless,
they all hover near the edge of biologism. Like the radical feminists,

  
   
   
  
 
   
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
    
   
  

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology ll

they endorse versions of a science based on subjectivity, intuition,
holism and harmony. While Rose and Hartsock in particular base
their materialist analyses on the gender division of labour, they fail
intake fully into account that ‘nature’ is not a fixed category and that
ieﬁdivision of labour is not unchanging. Therefore women’s subjec-
I ity, caring, holism and harmony, to which they appeal, cannot be
universal aspects of women’s experience. Their identification between
women’s caring labour and the new values to be incorporated into
ience cannot be construed as fixed or in any way as arising ‘naturally’.
.One attempt to overcome the limitations of the ‘standpoint
approach’ is the critique of a feminist science from the point of View
Ofafeminist postmodernism or deconstructionism. Harding has cor—
rectly warned that the feminine qualities celebrated by feminists do
not accurately reflect the social experience of all women as their
experience is divided by class, race and culture. If a new feminist
, science is to be created frometéiic‘standpoint of women’s experience,
_‘should there be a feminist science based on the experience of ‘Black
iiwomen, Asian women, Native American women, working-class
women, lesbian women?’ Taking her cue from feminist post-
modernism, Harding argues that the problem with feminist stand-
point epistemologies is that they assume that there is a single
privileged position from which science can be evaluated. There is no
‘woman’ to whose social experience the feminist empiricist and stand—
point approaches can appeal; there are instead the ‘fractured identities
of women’. This approach is useful in that it takes account of the dif-
ferences between and within individuals, and highlights the tension
between a unitary and a fragmented conceptualization of the voice of
feminism.

However the fact that there are class, race and cultural differences
between women and between men does not mean that gender dif-
ference is ‘either theoretically unimportant or politically irrelevant’
(Harding, 1986, p. 18). In virtually every culture, gender difference
is fundamental to social organization and personal identity. Qualities
associated with manliness are almost everywhere more highly
regarded than those thought of as womanly. Women have in common
the fact that they have been marginalized from every powerful insti-
tution of our society, especially from scientific institutions. This
acknowledgement of the universality of women’s subordination is not
incompatible with a recognition of the specific and variable forms of
this subordination. Different groups of women have different needs

and interests. . . . .
I share McNeil’s (1987) View that rationality and mturtion must

 

