Reproductive Technology 67

     

66 Reproductive Technology
" s, in comparison with social factors such as the standard of
tion and sanitation. As Jill Rakusen and Nick Davidson (1982,
2) put it: ‘The single most significant contribution to a cut in the
and handicap rate among newborn babies would be a com~
ensive anti-poverty programme? Indeed, the women whose
fare might be most enhanced by these medical technologies have
access to them.

e'strength of the feminist critique of professional medical care
tronly its dissection of medical—technological treatments but its
ysis of the way scientific and medical knowledge is itself gendered.

nderstand the medical treatment of birth, it is important to
ize that in the development of Western thought and medicine,

ody came to be regarded as a machine. The Cartesian model of
'ody as a machine and the physician as technician or mechanic
erged in the seventeenth century and was integral to the develop-
,::of the biomedical sciencesiéf'This mechanical metaphor continues
dominate modern medical practice and underlies the propensity to

p y technology and to see surgery as the appropriate cure.
I noted in chapter 1, gender symbolism and representations of

ital difference were central to the scientific and medical texts of the
eenth and nineteenth centuries. In contrast to the male norm,
en’s bodies were depictedias frail and prone to physical and
tntal disease, the prime objects of medical intervention. Ludi
danova’s recent book Sexual Visions contains fascinating material
he depiction of the differences between women and men in the
‘medical sciences between the eighteenth and twentieth centuries.
ese sciences were associated with the idea of the unveiling of nature,
woman, as the personification of nature and ‘the other’, was thus
appropriate corpse for the male practice of anatomy. (Although
gery of women’s bodies was predominant, the unveiling of ‘other—
3’ also took a racial form.) Jordanova argues that gender is still
entral medical metaphor and by examining advertisements in a con-
mporary medical magazine she explores the ways in which illnesses
are visually tagged as ‘male’ or ‘female’. ‘Depression, anxiety, sleep-r
ness and migraine are likely to be associated with women, while
orders that can inhibit full movement and strenuous sporting-
tivities are associated, metaphorically, with masculinityﬁr ‘
,144) 2
- {he language of the biomedical sciences today is no lesssuffused
thrimplicit assumptions about and imagery of sexualdiffere
hrough a detailed comparison of medical writings on the fa]
reproductive system with those on the male equivalent, Emily; ’

   

 
   
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  

shows, this episode is a good example of the complexity of arguments

about control. The doctors were resisting a process that would hav

3:: 31613133111111? process, it paradoxically ‘helped change the defini
g mm a natural home event as it wa ' '

. ‘ , s in the nineteen-t

century, to an illness requiring hospitalization and physician atten

dance’ (1986, p. 140).

. £55221? nthe trend has been towards the routine use of anaesthesia th
resort to forceps, thestandard practice of episiotomy ,and

Elgnficrpeasg in births: artiﬁcially induced as well as Caesarian see-
.eryaps the most v1vtd image of women’s treatment is ‘the

ziittgail-lsaspolssciible’ (Donnison, 1977, p. 198). A number of feminist
, me 11 mg Ann Oakley have ar '
‘ g , gued that this medic _
nmaalgaeguettgiir: :igreggancy and childbirth by a powerful profession:
, , uce women to the status of re d ‘ ‘ I H
engendering adverse emotional ' pro uctlve ObJCCtSs
- experiences for childb ' \
Contemporary feminists h ‘ eating women».
. , ave been particularly critical
. of the ex
to which. birth has been transformed from anatural ro ' tent
pathological one. p 0688 mm a
1133:2321 lfittrzﬁlhrecently g was generally assumed that maternal and
. s were re need as a direct result of th '
portion of hospital confinement ' ' 8 Increased pm-
. s and the application of t h
in pregnancy labour and birth This b ' ‘ CC n010gy
, . elief explains w ’
tolerance for a system th omen S apparent
. , at some have argued has tr f '
into a passive and alienatin ' ' ans ormc‘d birth
g experience. It is now ’d l
ledged however that in ' ‘ WI e y aCknow-
. many, if not in most c '
logical intervention in ‘ ' ' , ases’ masswe technO—
childbirth is unnecessa W’ ’
of risky births and women wh .ry. 1th the exception
; . 0 need Caesarian sectio '
vention is not a biological neces ' ' us, well inter—
srty; rather it reﬂects the stru
I , . . . . . ’ Ctur
of 152;: and deciSion making Within obstetrical situations. 6
comm) tsocrological and medical literature has been reevaluating the
11 ion of medical technology to the health of mothers and

   
  
  
 

 

