Conclusion 163

  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
   
   
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
 
 

en’s interests influence different areas of technology. Such research
it its infancy and I hope this book encourages its growth.
,Sociology’s partial analysis of factors bearing on the development
“ echnology has its corollary in an inadequate political response to
noiogy. The development of a critique of the technological deter-
isrn implicit in much of both the sociological and feminist
rature is thus politically apposite. For the notion that technology
neutral force determining the nature of society is a depressing one,
hing us of any power to affect its direction. Rather than seeing
ghnology as the key to progress or, more recently, the road to eco—
cal or military destruction, the social shaping approach provides
pe for human agency and political intervention.

aving said that, it may appear that the politics implicit in my
count are profoundly pessimistic. For if technology is imprinted
ipatriarchal designs, what is to be done? T 0 answer this I must
rstly reiterate that the relationship between technological and social
, nge is fundamentally indeterminate. The designers and promoters
" a technology cannot completely predict or control its final uses.
s ere are always unintended consequences and unanticipated possi-
lities. For example when, as a result of the organized movement of
cople with physical disabilities in the United States, buildings and
f'v’ernents were redesigned to improve mobility, it was not envisaged
,_t these reforms would help women manoeuvring prams around
ties. It is important not to underestimate women’s capacity to
bvert the intended purposes of technology and turn it to their
llective advantage. Although the telephone was developed and
‘arketed to directly duplicate the functions of the telegraph, we have
seen how women primarily use the telephone for sociability. Recog»
nition of such contradictions and the space they create for change is
particularly important in avoiding political pessimism.

dentifying the gendered character of technology need not lead to
rejection of existing ‘patriarchal’ technology. Neither does it require
us to abstain from working ‘in’ technology. This is where I part com-
pany with those-feminists who adopt an essentialist position that seeks
to base a new technology on a fixed and universal set of women’s
values. Forinstance, eon-feminism maintains that women are closer
than men to nature and that the technologies men have created are
based on the domination of women as well as nature. This approach
locks us into a double bind: technology is irredeemably masculinist,
exploitative and militarist, yet women need and want technological
skills and competence. An appeal to an idealized femininity is no way
‘ Out of this dilemma; rather than simply going ‘back to nature’, we

Conclusion

Thisbook is intended as a contribution to both academic and politi
debates about the connections between gender, technology ‘
society. Drawing on perspectives from radical science to ra
feminism, I have argued that the use/abuse model that repre
technology itself as neutral, and asserts that it is the human ap
cation of technology that determines whether it has beneficial
destructive effects, does not go far enough. By contrast, the so
shaping approach insists that technology is always a form of so,
knowledge, practices and products. It is the result of conﬂicts a
compromises, the outcomes of which depend primarily on
distribution of power and resources between different groups
society. Although there are other equally powerful forces shap
technology, such as militarism, capitalist profitability, and racis
this book has concentrated on gender. Nuclear weapons, for examp

are the product of both the military—industrial complex and patri
chal culture.

ening the definition of technology, and tracing the origins an
development of ‘women’s sphere’ technology that have often been con

the sociology of technology still suffers from a male bias that is largel
interested in manufacturing and, more recently, military technology

However, the search for a general feminist theory of technology
or of science, is misguided. It is important to show that the develop
ment of technology has been mediated by gender power relations, bu

analyse the speciﬁc social interests that structure the knowledge and i
practice of particular kinds of technology. As more empirical work
IS done, it may be possible to draw further links between the ways

