16 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

There is new evidence that during the industrial era, women
invented or contributed to the invention of such crucial machines as
the cotton gin, the sewing machine, the small electric motor, the
McCormick reaper, and the Jacquard loom (Stanley, forthcoming).
This sort of historical scholarship often relies heavily on patent
records to recover women’s forgotten inventions. It has been noted
that many women’s inventions have been credited to their husbands
becausethey actually appear in patent records in their husbands’
name. This is explained in terms of women’s limited property rights,
as well as the general ridicule afforded women inventors at that time
(Pursell, 1981; Amram, 1984; Griffiths, 1985). Interestingly, it may
be that even the recovery of women inventors from patent records
seriously underestimates their contribution to technological develop-
ment. In a recent article on the role of patents, Christine MacLeod
(1987) observes that prior to 1700 patents were not primarily about
the recording of the actual inventor, but were instead sought in the
name of financial backers.lo Given this, it is even less surprising that
so few women’s names are to be found in patent records.

For all but a few exceptional women, creativity alone was not suf-
ficient. In order to participate in the inventive activity of the Industrial
Revolution, capital as well as ideas were necessary. It was only in 1882
that the Married Women’s Property Act gave English women legal
possession and control of any personal property independently of
their husbands. Dot Griffiths (1985) argues that the effect of this was
to virtually exclude women from participation in the world of the
inventorrentrepreneur. At the same time women were being denied
access to education and specifically to the theoretical grounding in
mathematics and mechanics upon which so many of the inventions
and innovations of the period were based. As business activities
expanded-and were moved out of the home, middle-class women were
increasingly left to a life of enforced leisure. Soon the appropriate
education for girls became ‘accomplishments’ such as embroidery and
music - accomplishments hardly conducive to participation in the
world of the inventor~entrepreneur. In the current period, there has
been considerable interest in the possible contributions which Ada
Lady Lovelace, Grace Hopper and other women may have made to
the development of computing. Recent histories of computer pro-
gramming provide substantial evidence for the view that women
played a major part.“

To fully comprehend women’s contributions to technological devel—
opment, however, a more radical approach may be necessary. For a
start, the traditional conception of technology too readily defines

 

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology 17

technology in terms of male activities. As I have pointed out above,

the concept of technology is itself subject to historical change, and

idifferent'epochs and cultures had different names for what we now
think of as technology. A greater emphasis on women’s activities
immediately suggests that females, and in particular black women,
were among the first technologists. After all, women were the main
, gatherers, processors and storers of plant food from earliest human

itimes onward. It was therefore logical that they should be the ones
to have invented the tools and methods involved in this work such as
the digging stick, the carrying sling, the reaping knife and sickle,
rpestles and pounders. In this vein, Autumn Stanley (forthcoming)
illustrates women’s early achievements 1n horticulture and agriculture,
such as the hoe, the scratch plow, grafting, hand pollination, and early
irrigation.

‘ If it were not for the male bias in most technology research, the
significance of these inventions would be acknowledged. As Ruth

Schwartz Cowan notes:

_ The indices to the standard histories of technology . . . do not contain
a single reference, for example, to such a significant cultural artifact
as the baby bottle. Here is a simple implement . . . which has

transformed a fundamental human experience for vast numbers of
infants and mothers, and been‘one of the more controversial exports
of Western technology to underdeveloped countries -— yet it finds no
place in our histories of technology.(l979, p. 52)

There is important work to be done not only in identifying women
inventors, but also in discovering the origins and paths of develop—

»rment of ‘women’s sphere’ technologies that seem often to have been

considered beneath notice.

A Technology Based on Women's Values?

During the eighties, feminists have begun to focus on the gendered
character of technology itself. Rather than asking how women could
be more equitably treated within and by a neutral technology, many
feminists now argue that Western technology itself embodies patriar—
chal values. This parallels the way in which the feminist critique of
science evolved from asking the ‘woman question’ in science to asking
the more radical ‘science question’ in feminism. Technology, like
science, is seen as deeply implicated in the masculine project of
the domination and control of women and nature.I2 Just as many
feminists have argued for a science based on women’s values, so too

