  
   
   
  
     
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
   
   
    
   
   
 
   

152 Technology as Masculine Culture Technology as Masculine Culture 153

ctively and aggressively capture computer time where, as is usually
the case, there is insufficient computer supply. in schools. This
'arassment of girls interested in computing continues into tertiary
education. At this stage the harassment takes the form of obscene
computer mail or print—outs of nude women. Women students in

This drop appears to be linked to the widespread introduction of
microcomputers into schools. Here girls quickly learn that computer
are ‘just for the boys’. Numerous investigations into the nude
representation of girls in science have indicated how the presentatio
of the subject alienates girls.l3 Computers have been linked to thin"
scientiﬁc and mathematical, traditionally male subjects. Therexh
been a tendency to site school microcomputers in the science/maths
department and computer studies is almost always taught by math;
matics teachers, usually male. Even though it is now generally recog
nized that ability in mathematics is not an indication of aptitude to
computing, it is still taken into account for entry to computing courses
at school. ‘Thus computers tend to be conceptually assimilated to _ f
category of science, mathematics and technology and acquire. sorn

of the traditional-qualities of differentiated interest amongst boys an Many children’s toys encourage boys to be assertive and indepen-

cut, to solve problems; experiment with construction and, more
ecently, to regard the technological aspects of their toys With confi—
ence and familiarity. The skills which children learn from these toys
lay the foundations of mathematical, scientific and technological
earning. By contrast, ‘girls’ toys’ such as dolls foster different skills
which are associated with caring and social interaction. Just as boys
ften come to school with the advantage of havmg played With
mechanical toys, or connectedsan electric train set, they now have
f-tenplayed video games at home. Toys are an important part of the
ifferentiated learning experiences-between girls and boys. Theseitoys
in turn reﬂect the division of labour between women and menial-thin;
the family. In the chapter on domestic technology we saw theiwayistn:
which household technologies are sharply gendered. Technologiesxof}
external household and car maintenance are traditionally» the h
bands’ sphere, while women primarily use the technoiﬂgles ,
kitchen and cleaning. Moreover, control of technologies!) can:
‘ merit such as the television and video recorder are also;
I , Computers all too easily fit in to this sex~stereotyped
noiogy. There is a tendency for the home micro.10‘f:M
sons of the family. This is encouraged by advertisemen
games and home computers which are aimeda ‘
often feature pictures of boys looking raptly lat".
collected by the Equal Opportunitiestomnussto
that of all British households owning microchip
times more likely than girls to be using them.
cent of micros are used by their mothers.xChd
their parents which are the appropriate sp,
California survey in which school children wet

   

gender and sexuality through the ‘hidden curriculum’ ~ teaching in an
implicit way meanings and behaviours associated with femaleness and
maleness, with femininity and masculinity. Studies of classroom
show that teachers behave differently to girls and boys, they speak
to them differently, they require different responses and differen

 

children’s perception of themselves. Girls feel the need to display a
set of behavioural patterns that are perceived as being feminine: these
feminine qualities are however incompatible with the qualities sup— .
posed necessary for a ‘mathematical mind’.” Girls internalize the ::
belief that boys possess something that they lack; difference is lived '
as inferiority. One study of primary school children reported, for, ,
example, that ‘Iglirls actually believed that boys were naturally
ordained with a profusion of masculine esoteric skills such as being .
able to drive a car, tractor or helicopter’ (Clarricoates, 1980, p. 39).
Computers are seen as belonging to the realm of machinery and =
mathematics -— a daunting combination for girls.

However there is a danger here of implying that, in conforming to ,
the gender stereotype and thus rejecting technology, girls are their .
own worst enemy. Feminists have now challenged this passive model
of female socialization, arguing that girls may well use their femi~
trinity as a form of resistance at school, or even resist feminine roles
themselves (Barton and Walker, 1983). Some girls are interested in
computers but it is difficult for them to pursue this because boys

   
   
   
  
    
 
 
  
 
  

 

 

