Domestic Technology 95

  
  
   
    
  
  
  
   
  
  
  
     
    
  
  
   
     
  
   
  
    
   
   
  
 
  
  
  
   

94 Domestic Technology

attire on ‘home informatics’. lan Miles (1988), .who collaboraktled
Gershuny on the research into the self-servrce economy, :8
"pted to chart the next wave of technological innovations, t e
”formation and communication technologies, and their effects
e household. He argues that the new consumer electronic

nets of the coming decade are of major economic and sacral
I knee. There is much speculation about theﬁfully automated
f the future known as a ‘smart house’ or ‘interactive home
5’ where appliances will be able to communicate with each other
to the house within an integrated system. Miles predicts that home
imaticswillsbring substantial changes to people 5 ways of life, one
hich will be to improve the quality of domestic work both in terms
hetconvenience and effort required. However, Miles tp.‘ 134) givesi
,easons whatsoever for his hope that this Will result. in the sexua
’ 'sion oflabour between men and women in families . f
he. sociological literature'oné’ithe electronic, self—servicmg home 0
future remains remarkably insensitive to gender issues. 1!; par;
him, it ignores the way in which the home. means very d1: eren
gs for men and women. Many of the new information an con;
5’ nication technologies are being developed for the tncreasrng tron1
ardshome-centred leisure and entertainment. But leisure is degp y
ded along the genderlines..Many of these technologies, suc . as
«home computer, demand that the'user spend consrderable ogre
idconcentration mastering it. Butwomen have a lot less time or
y- in the. home than men and boys. Programming the electronic
stem for the ‘smart house’ may enhance men’s domestic power.
urthermore, the possibilities of home-basedcommercial operatiops,
:om ‘telebanking’ and shopping to ‘teleworkmg’, are likely to mvo ‘le
lore housework forv’women in catering for other home-based fanny1
embers. Although Miles’ subtitle is ‘lnformation Technology an
e Transformation of Everyday Life’, what 18 striking about these
ew technologies is just how little power they have to transform

veryday life within the domestic world.

his interest in they impact of domestic technology. However: ‘
difficult to maintain that women’s domestic work time has tied
because of the diffusion of domesticequipment whilst arguing? ,
men’s domestic work time has marginally increased at the same ti‘ '
Men’sincrease is explained in terms :of changing norms andvth
inadvertently Gershuny-calls into question any direct connec
between the domestictechnol‘ogy and thettime spent on housew ,

Indeed it seems that the preoccupation with increases in produ
tivityt due to‘technological innovation blinds many analysts to more
fundamental social factors. For example, the presence or absence .«
children, their age and their number all haversignificantly great
effects on time spent in «housework than any combination of techn
logical developments. Similarly, the presence of men in a household
increases women’s domestic work time by at least a third. In contras
for men, living with women means thatthey do less domestic wo
(Wyatt et al., ‘ 1985, p. 39). Furthermore, it has repeatedly been four,
that the amountof time women spend on housework is reduced
proportion to theamount of time they spend in paid employment ’9'

«Amajor problem with most time~budget research is that it does.
not recognize that the essence of housework is to combine man
things, usually-concurrently. This has a profound bearing on the
interpretation of time spent in childcare and the apparent growth 0
leisure time. For example, watching television or listening to the radio"
can be combined with childcare, cooking, ironing (and washing
laundry. And, as I have pointed out with the case of television, this,
data would be particularly revealing with regardto women. Time,
budgets do not analyse whether activities are undertakenexclusivelyf
or in combination with another activity. Perhaps, as Michael Bittmanf
(1988) suggests, the privateand gendered character of the household
promotes the kinds of technological innovations that maximize the
number of tasks that can be performedsimultaneously. To resOlve
such issues we would need‘more detailed information about'the extent
of use of: consumer durables, the material output of services per-
formed in the home and the social significance that these activities
have for people. Gershuny’s focus on technological innovations and
tasks per se seems indicative, once again, of a technicist orientation
which 'sees the organization of the household as largely determined
by machines.

A technicist orientation is also evident in much of the futuristic

alternatives to Individualized Housework

‘ , most forward looking of the futurists have us livmg in
hzfllsleltildlds which, in social rather than technological terms, resemble
he households of today. A more radical approach would be to transj
form the social context in which domestic technology applies. lnivrew-
of what has been said about the shortcomings of domestic techno egg,

 
    
 

