50 The Technology of Production

there was nothing inevitable about this. Electronic circuitry is in fact
perfectly capable of producing a Linotype lay on the new—style board.
Linotype Paul have manufactured one. The lay of the Linotype key—
board differs greatly from QWERTY. Not only does it have 90 keys
in contrast to 44, the relative position of the letters of the alphabet
also differs from that of a typewriter and the keys are larger and
spread further apart.

So what politics lie behind the design and selection of this key—
board? In choosing to dispense with the Linotype layout, manage-

ment were choosing a system that would undermine the skill and

power basis of the Linotype operators, the highest paid of all the
craftsmen. All the operators would be reduced to novices on the new
board, as the inputting would now require little more than good typing
ability. This would render typists (mainly women) and Linotype
operators (men) equal competitors for the new machines; indeed, it
would» advantage the women typists. The QWERTY technique was
designed with an eye to using the relatively cheap and abundant labour
of female typists.

The history of mechanized typesetting offers another instance of
clear sex—bias within the design of equipment. A nineteenth—century
rival to the Linotype was the Hattersley typesetter. Compositors hated
technical systems such as the Hattersley typesetter that separated the
jobs of composing and distribution. It had a separate mechanism for
distributing type, designed for use by girls. The separation of the
setting (skilled) and distribution (the unskilled job of putting the
letters back in their letter box) was devised as a means of reducing
overall labour costs. Compositors feared that employers would try to
expand this use of cheaper, unskilled labour once it got a foothold
into the composing room.

The Linotype machine on the other hand did not represent the
destruction but merely the mechanization of the compositors’ setting
skills as a whole. The key aspect of this successful machine was that
it eliminated distribution as a task — since letters were formed anew
each time by the action of brass mould on molten metal. Afterthe
type was used it was simplyymelted down ready to be re—used. The
compositorsactually welcomed the Linotype machine because it did
not depend for its success on the employment of child labour. The
men’s union, the London Society of Compositors, even wrote a letter
to the Linotype Company Ltd. in 1893 congratulating them: ‘The

Linotype answers to one of the essential conditions of trade unionism, ,

in that it does not depend for its success on the employment of boy
or girl labour’. 0n the contrary, by cutting out the task of distribution,

  
  
   
 
   
   
   
   
  
   
    
 
   
  
 
  
  
   
   
    
  

The Technology of Production 5]

he trade. Thus, in deference to the organizational strength of the
union, the Linotype manufacturing company adopted a technology
hat was beneficial to the union men.
Perhaps, finally, there is another level on which the technology of
reduction reflects male power. Feminists have understandably
ended to under-emphasize the material realities of physical power,
iven that women’s exclusion from numerous occupations has been
gitimated in biological terms. It is often still said that men are
,,aturally stronger and therefore more suited to certain types of work.
yowever, as Cockburn (1983, p. 203) correctly stresses, ‘the construc—
tionof men as strong and capable, manually able and technologically
endowed, and women as physically and technically incompetent’ is a
' ial process. It is the result of different childhood exposure to
hnology, the prevalence of different role models, different forms
schooling, and the extreme sex‘segregation of the job market. The
ffect of this is an implicit bias in the design of machinery and job
entent towards male strength.
,In composing work, the lifting and carrying of the forme is a case
point. The forme is heavy and in fact beyond the strength of not
nly women but also many men, particularly older men and younger
rentices. However, by defining this task as one that requires
scle, women workers cannot threaten to undercut men’s labour.
I Size and weight of the forme is in fact arbitrary. Printing presses
tithe printed sheet could have been smaller too. Tradition alone has
‘ ided at what weight the use of hoists and trolleys to transport the
me is introduced. There is nothing natural about units of work.
ether it is hay bales or 50-kilo bags of cement or plaster, they are
tical in their design. Capitalists and workers have a political

 

kers and women as inadequate.

is‘overwhelmingly males who design technological process and
strial machinery. It is the knowledge and experience of engineers
of the workers ‘who use the machines which filters through into
hape of new technologies. Mechanical equipment is often manu-
ured and assembled in ways that make it just too big and heavy
he ‘average’ woman to use. This need not be a conscious process
rconspiracy. It is rather the outcome of a pre—existing pattern of
‘ower. This is not to imply that men always design technology for

