8 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

confined to the private sphere of hearth and home. Skills such as
reasoning and objectivity became associated with public life, and
feeling and subjectivity with private life. These dichotomies have
become historically associated with the development of distinctive
feminine and masculine worldviews.

In a well-known article, Rose (1983) locates herself within the
radical science tradition and endorses the Marxist characterization of
bourgeors science as a form of alienated and abstract knowledge. It
is the division of mental and manual labour, integral to capitalist pro-
duction, which gives rise to this form of knowledge. Rose takes issue
with this tradition however for its failure to question the impact of
the gender division of labour on science. The focus of the radical
scrence critique on the relations of production to the exclusion of
reproduction negates women’s experience, which in turn impoverishes
scrence. Science has been denied the input of women’s experience of
the caring, emotionally demanding labour which has been assigned
exclusrvely to women. According to Rose, a feminist science would
needto encompass this emotional domain and thereby fuse subjective
and objective ways of knowing the world. It would thus be a more
complete, truer knowledge because it is based on women’s ‘shared
experience of oppression’. Rose concludes that the reunification of
‘hand, brain and heart’ would foster a new form of science, enabling
humanity to live in harmony with nature.

A Science Based on Women's Values?

These debates about science mirror the more general preoccupations
that, have, engaged feminists over the last two decades. Much early
second—wave feminism was of a liberal cast, demanding access for
women within existing power structures, such as science. In principle,
equality could be achieved by breaking down gender stereotypes:
for instance by giving girls better training and more varied role
models, and by introducing equal opportunity programmes and anti—
discrimmation legislation. Such feminist writing focused on gender
stereotypes and customary expectations, and denied the existence of
any fundamental sex differences between women and men. This first
approach, liberal feminism, was based on an empiricist View of science
as. (gender) neutral. Sexism and androcentrism were therefore con—
ceived of as social biases correctable by stricter adherence to the
extsting methodological norms of scientific inquiry. I would argue
that the limitations of this approach have been made apparent by the

  
   
  
     
  
  
    
   
  

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology 9

sociology of scientific knowledge and the profound critique of empiri-
Cism that has occurred in the last few decades.

By the late 19708 however a new form of radical feminism, or
cultural feminism as it is known in North America, had emerged
, Erich-exalted femininity for its own sake. These writers emphasize
gender difference and celebrate what they see as specifically feminine,
such as ‘women’s greater humanism, pacifism, nurturance and spirit-
" ualtdevelopment. Some of these authors abandoned the idea that what
was ‘s‘pecifically feminine’ was socially produced and notions of
,ineradicablc difference have flourished.

‘ This return to an emphasis on natural or psychological gender dif-
ference is a common thread in many of the feminist views of science.
They promote women’s values as an essential aspect of human expe-
rience and seek a new vision of science that would incorporate these
values. At this juncture therefore, I think it apprOpriate to point to
some fundamental problems‘7wi't’h the general assertion of a science
based on women’s values.

’ iEssentialism, or the assertion of fixed, unified and opposed female
and male natures has been subjected to a variety of thorough
“critiques.5 The first thing that must be said is that the values being
ascribed to women originate in the historical subordination of
’Women. The belief in the unchanging nature of women, and their
"association with procreation, nurturance, warmth and creativity, lies
at the very heart of traditional and oppressive conceptions of
womanhood. ‘Women value nurturance, warmth and security, or at
least we believe we ought to, precisely because of, not in spite of, the
meanings, culture and social relations of a world where men are more
powerful than women’ (Segal, 1987, p. 34). It is important to see how
women came to value nurturance and how nurturance, associated
with motherhood, came to be culturally defined as feminine within
male—dominated culture. Rather than asserting some inner essence of
womanhood as an ahistorical category, we need to recognize the ways
in which both ‘masculinity’ and ‘femininity’ are socially constructed
and are in fact constantly under reconstruction.

Secondly, the idea of ‘nature’ is itself culturally constructed. Con—
ceptions of the ‘natural’ have changed radically throughout human
history. As anthropologists like Marilyn Strathern and others have
pointed out, ‘no single meaning can in fact be given to nature or
culture in Western thought; there is no consistent dichotomy, only a
matrix of contrasts’ (Strathern, 1980, p. 177). These feminist anthro-
pologists have questioned the claim that in all societies masculinity is
associated with culture and femininity with nature. Moreover, they

 

 

 

 

 

 

