44 The Technology of Production

their position. As we have already seen, this mechanism of social
exclusion was often deployed at the expense of women workers.

Technological innovations have played a major role in these battles
for control over productionﬁln the early phases of capitalist devel-
opment, machinery was used by the owners and managers of capital
as an important weapon in the battle for control over production.
Marx’s classic account of the development of the automatic spinning
‘mule’ (so—called because it was a hybrid of the spinning-jenny and
water-frame) in nineteenth-century Britain has, for example, been
re—examined from this perspective. In the early production process
of spinning the skilled adult male spinner had a central role. The
spinner’s centrality derived not only from his technical skills but also
from his supervisory role through the system of sub-contracting
labour. The spinners were highly unionized and their frequent strikes
were a direct challenge to the power and proﬁts of the cotton—masters.
The self-acting mule was the employers’ response to this threat.

A major strike in 1824 seems to have galvanized a number of
manufacturers into recognizing their common interest in relation to
the spinners. They therefore approached Richard Roberts, a well-,
known mechanical engineer and toolmaker. Roberts told the House
of Lords Select Committee in 1851: ‘The self-acting mule was made
in consequence of a turn-out of the spinners at Hyde, which had lasted
three months, when a deputation of masters waited upon me, and
requested me to turn my attention to spinning, with the view of
making the mule self-acting’ (Bruland, 1982, p. 103).

The explicit purpose of this invention and its introduction was to
break the power of the spinners. By changing the technology of
spinning they intended to replace men on the mules with the cheaper
labour of women and children. The self-actor was partially successful
in its aim of curbing the spinners’ militancy. In the period following
the innovation, their wages were relatively depressed and strikes
declined markedly. This episode exemplifies the way in which par-
tiCula'r arenas of industrial conﬂict may result in the development of
particular kinds of technical innovations.

In fact, the diffusion of the self-actor was relatively slow and did
not have the anticipated effect of destroying the craft position of
the adult male spinners. Despite radical changes in the manual com-
ponent of mule spinning, these workers retained their position. The
spinner-piecer system was merely replaced by an analogous minder-
piecer system, which still left minders with responsibility for recruiting
assistants and controlling them on the shop ﬂoor. This hierarchical

 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  

The Technology of Production 45

‘ _, ision within the workforce persisted because it was the basis of the
2'sting managerial structure in cotton spinning.

. William Lazonick (1979) has shown that this reliance of the
imployers on a very effective form of labour management was more
portant than the skills or organized strength of the male minders.
usit was the hierarchical division within the working class which
nditioned technical change.

It made it rational for capitalists to work with slightly less automated
mules than were technically possible, so that failures of attention by
operatives led not to ‘snarls’ that could be hidden in the middle of spun
‘cops’, but to the obvious disaster of ‘sawney’, where the several hun-
dred threads being spun all broke simultaneously, with consequent loss
of piecework earnings for the minder. (MacKenzie, 1984, p. 497).

’ The history of the self-acting»é:zrlnule demonstrates that an under-
,tanding of technical change as something that is based on relations
£production must include an account of divisions within the working
ss. It not only shows how workers’ resistance depends on their
‘bility to control and restrict entry into their trade but also how
mployers can exploit these divisions. So the skilled worker typically
oaks not just in one direction - towards the capitalist’who is trying
0 undermine his position by incorporating his skills into the
machine — but also towards the mass of the ‘unskilled’, who can
qually be seen as a threat. Typically, this will involve older, male,
white workers looking in the direction of those who have at least one
_ , the characteristics of being young, female, black or from an ethnic
"minority.

. The development of technology cannot however simply be under-
~ stood in terms of the needs of undifferentiated capital trying to
patrol labour as an undifferentiated mass. Recent labour process
work has repeatedly pointed to the weakness of assuming any simple
and ubiquitous trend in the social construction of technology for
, control through deskilling.lo Further it has highlighted the need to
recognize differences of interest and action amongst capitalists.
«pThe focus has shifted to the interplay between competing
managerial strategies and priorities on the one hand, and various
patterns of worker response on the other. There are now many docu—
3 merited instances where occupational competition was settled in
favour of enlarged control by craft workers as well as cases where
detailed control and deskilling by technology was the result

 

