80 Reproductive technology

16

17

, Merkin 'stated that the new contraceptive ~ the IPD‘- was a brain.

  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
   
  
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
   
  
    
  
   
   
 
    
  
  
    
  
  
   
  
 
  

conception from sex, it was actually ﬁrst performed in 1776 (McLare
1984, p. 13)
See also Doyal (1979), especially chapter 7 on ‘Medicine an
Imperialism’. ,
This point is well made in a parody of a new contraceptive techni ,
fer men reprinted in Spare Rib (Vol.93, April 1980, p. 9) reprodu 2
below

omeshc Technology.

SCROTAL INFECTION ‘Oniy 2 died’
The newest development in male contraception was unveiled recently
the American Women’s Surgical Symposium held at Ann Arbor Merit,
Centre. Dr Sophie Merkin, of the Merkin Clinic, announced, th
preliminaryfindings of a study conducted on 763 unsuspecting 1m ,
undergraduate students at a large midwest university. In her report, _

there in the land of household work there are small industrial plants
1 ch sit idle for the better part of every working day; there are
pensive pieces of highly mechanized equipment which only get used
;or twice a month; there are consumption units which weekly
gndle out to their markets to buy 8 ounces of this nonperishable
oduct and 12 ounces of that enmgThere are also workers who do not
i job descriptions, time clocks, or even paychecks.

' CoWan, From Virginia Dare to Virginia Slims

 

through in male contraception. It will be marketed under the trade-nay .
‘Umbrelly’. ’

with a plunger-like instrument. Occasionally there is perforation of

scrotum but this is disregarded since it is known that the male has ' '
- - ' 1 ‘ ‘ mtroduCtion of technology into the home has especially affected

' 11? s lives and the work that goes on in the household Indeed,
been suggested that we shnnld conceive of an industrial revo—
as having occurred in the heme too, that ‘the change from the
dry tub to the washing machine is no less profound than the
go from the hand loom to the poiver loom’ (Cowan, 1976,
” 9). Women’s unpaid work 1n the home, servicing men, children
" ers, has for a long time been seen by feminists as the key to
n ’s oppression. Relieving women of this burden has been a
reject of feminism. As in other spheres, considerable opti-
has attached to the possibility that technology may provide the
to gender inequality in the home.

_ the 19705 housework has finally become the object of serious
mic study by historians, sociologists and even a few economists.
as part of a general concern With the relationship between the
11g structures of industrial capitalism and the shaping of every-
life within the household The Sociology of Housework by Ann
.ipublished in 1974 marked an important break in treating
eurork as Work within the framework of industrial sociology. In
ante year, Joann Vanek’s article on ‘Time Spent in Housework’
pared the findings of the US time use studies of housework from
19205 to the late 19608. She argued that the aggregate time spent
"11 housework by fullotime housewives had remained remarkably

be 100 per cent effective in preventing production of sperm,
eminently satisfactory to the female whale since it does not interfere w
her rutting pleasure.

Dr Merkin declared the umbrelly to be statistically safe for theihum
male. She reported that of the 763 graduate students tested with th
device only two died of scrotal infection, only 20 experiencedswellin
of the tissues. Three developed cancer of the testicles, and l3‘were to
depressed to have an erection She stated that common complain
ranged from cramping and bleeding to acute abdominal pain. Sh
emphasized that these symptoms were merely indications that the man
body had not yet adjusted to the device. Hopefully the symptoms woul
disappear within a year.

One complication caused by the IPD and brieﬂy mentioned by, D
Merkin was the incidence of massive scrotal infection necessitatingth
surgical removal of the testicles. ‘But this is a rare case,’ said Merki
‘too rare to be statistically important.’ She and otherdistinguished 'mem
bers of the Women’s College of Surgeons agreed that the beneﬁts f
outweighed the risk to any individual man. (reprinted fromEast Ba
Men’s Centre Newsletter and The Periodical Lunch, Ann Arbo
Michigan.)

 

