20 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

process debate of the 19708. Just as the radical science movement had
sought to expose the class character of science, these writers attempted
to extend the class analysis to technology. In doing so, they were
countering the theory of ‘technological determinism’ that remains so
widespread.

According to this account, changes in technology are the most
important cause of social change. Technologies themselves are neutral
and impinge on society from the outside; the scientists and technicians
who produce new technologies are seen to be independent of their
social location and above sectional interests. Labour process analysts
were especially critical of a technicist version of Marxism in which the
development of technology and productivity is seen as the motor force
of history. This interpretation represented technology itself as beyond
class struggle.

With the publication of Harry Braverman’s Labor and Monopoly
Capital (1974), there was a revival of interest in Marx’s contribution
to the study of technology, particularly in relation to work.
Braverman restored Marx’s critique of technology and the division of
labour to the centre of his analysis of the process of capitalist develOp-
ment. The basic argument of the labour process literature which
developed was that capitalist—worker relations are a major factor
affecting the technology of production within capitalism. Historical
case studies of the evolution and introduction of particular techno-
logies documented the way in which they were deliberately designed
to deskill and eliminate human labour.l3 Rather than technical
inventions developing inexorably, machinery was used by the owners
and managers of capital as an important weapon in the battle for
control over production. So, like science, technology was understood
to be the result of capitalist social relations.

This analysis provided a timely challenge to the notion of techno-
logical determinism and, in its focus on the capitalist division of
labour, it paved the way for the development of a more sophisticated
analysis of gender relations and technology. However, the labour
process approach was gender-blind because it interpreted the social
relations of technology in exclusively class terms. Yet, as has been well
established by the socialist feminist current in this debate, the relations
of production are constructed as much out of gender divisions as class
divisions. Recent writings (Cockburn, 1983, 1985; Faulkner and
Arnold, 1985; McNeil, 1987) in this historical vein see women’s
exclusion from technology as a consequence of the gender division of
labour and the male domination of skilled trades that developed under
capitalism. In fact, some argue that prior to the industrial revolution

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology 21

   
  
  
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
   
   
 
   
   

women had more opportunities to acquire technical skills, and that
capitalist technology has become more masculine than previous
technologies. ,

{have already described how, in the early phases of industrializa-
n, women were denied access to ownership of capital and access
to education. Shifting the focus, these authors show that the rigid
pattern of gender divisions which developed within the working-class
‘ the context of the new industries laid the foundation for the male
dominance of technology. It was during this period that manufac-
ing moved into factories, and home became separated from paid
Qork. The advent of powered machinery fundamentally challenged
[aditional craft skills because tools were literally taken out of the
hands of workers and combined into machines. But as it had been men
who on the whole had technical skills in the period before the
industrial revolution, they were in a unique position to maintain a
monopoly over the new skills creaged by the introduction of machines.
‘,Male craft workers could not prevent employers from drawing
omen into the new spheres of production. So instead they organized
retain certain rights over technology by actively resisting the entry
women to their trades. Women who became industrial labourers
found themselves working in what were considered to be unskilled
‘ Jobs for the lowest pay. ‘It is the most damning indictment of skilled
working-class men and their unions that they excluded women from
‘ membership and prevented them gaining competences that could have
secured them a decent living’ (Cockburn, 1985, p. 39). This gender
division of labour within the factory meant that the machinery was
[designed by men with men in mind, either by the capitalist inventor
or. by skilled craftsmen. Industrial technology from its origins thus
reflects male power as well as capitalist domination.

is The masculine culture of technology is fundamental to the way in
which the gender division of labour is still being reproduced today.
By securing control of key technologies, men are denying women the
practical experience upon which inventiveness depends. I noted earlier
the degree to which technical knowledge involves tacit, intuitive
knowledge and ‘learning by doing’. New technology typically emerges
not from sudden flashes of inspiration but from existing technology,
by a process of gradual modification to, and new combinations of,
that existing technology. Innovation is to some extent an imaginatiVe
process, but that imagination lies largely in seeing ways in which
existing devices can be improved, and in extending the scope of
techniques successful in one area into new areas. Therefore giving
women access to formal technical knowledge alone does not provide

