Reproductive Technology 55

3

Reproductive Technology:
Deliver-ed into Men's‘Hcm-ds

 

    
   
    
 
 
 
  
    
     
     
 

Nowhere is the relationship between gender and technology more
vigorously contested than in the sphere of human biological reproduc "
tion. Women are the bearers, and in most societies the: primary nur ,
turers, of children. This means that reproductive technologies are of
partiCular signiﬁcance to them; Birth control has been a major issu ,
for all movements for women’s equality; and much feminist scholar '
ship has been devoted to uncovering women’s struggle throughou
history against the appropriation of medical knowledge and practic
hymen. '

Central to this analysis and of increasing relevance today is the:
perception that the processes of pregnancy and childbirth are directe
and controlled by ever more sophisticated and intrusive technologies. ;
Implicit in this view is a concept of reproduction as a natural process, 2
inherent in women alone, and a theory of technology as patriarchal,:
enabling the male domination of women and nature.

The burgeoning debate about these issues has largely been con
ducted within the feminist movement on the one hand and within the
fundamentalist Right on the other. Interestingly, socialists have
generally been silent on recent developments in reproductive techno—
logy, perhaps because they primarily affect women, or perhaps;
because they do not concern workplace production, the Left’s tradi»
tional obsession. But these are the technologies of life, raising coma
plex moral issues about the role of human intervention in the world;
of living beings. This chapter will explore feminist perspectives on:
reproductive technologies, placing them in the wider context of the:
growing supremacy of technology in medicine.

 

,_ DORE?j
HERSELF 1N , H

 

Source: Recycled Images

most important cause of changes in society.1 Perhaps here more
ﬁelsewhere, major technological advances are seen as having
etly transformediwomen’s lives for the better. The technologies of
gnancy and childbirth are said to have put an end to the dangerous
painful aspects, of giving birth-Healthy pregnancies and healthy
pics are attributed to the wonders of modern antenatal care, now
‘ghly Emedicalized and, technologized process. The new sophisti-
eil techniques for monitoring foetal development in the early stages
pregnanCy mean that same ‘defective’ foetuses can be aborted.
ertile women who previously had‘no options can now embark
infertility programmes that promise the chance of conceiving
anally. And,,most common of all, advances in the technologies
.7 f‘fertility control are seen as the key to the massive social changes
that have occurred, for women’s equality. The widespread availability

 

Feminist Perspectives on Reproductive Technology

The literature on reproductive technology is rife with technological
determinist arguments which assume that changes in technology are

