 
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
   
  
  
 
  
 
     

68 R d ‘
epro ucttve Technology Reproductive Technology 69

‘ torically and cross-culturally it is evident that women commonly
lice the process themselves, not simply deferring to the expectant
ther’s own wishes. To counterpose masculine technologized child-
’orwomen’s ‘natural’ ways begs the question. The issue is not
Echildbirthr-was or would be like for women without the controls

edby modern technology, but why the technologies we have
the form they do. Thus we need to look at the social context in
h the new, reproductive technologies have developed.

(1987) found that the cultural grammar was radically distinc I
Whereas the dominant metaphors used of the female system at
negative and demeaning to women, by contrast those used of the mal
system suggested power and positive qualities. The images contain

sperm .is depicted as ‘amazing . . . in its sheer magnitude? I
obstetric literature, the uterus is regarded: as: the machine th

noiogy and Professionalizotion

l: professions, claiming expert technical knowledge has been
used-as a way of legitimating specialization. The unequal power
ens between medical practitioners and their female patients are
(Lona combination se£;:«factors, predominantly those of profes-
nal qualification and gentle akley argues that the technological
rative within reproductive medicine is intrinsic to the defence of
0178?: claims of , professionalism. ‘Indeed, retention of absolute
relaoverztechnical procedures is clearly an absolute necessity for
urvival of modern medical power’ (Oakley, 1987, p. 46). The term
- *ological imperative’uwas originally! used by Fuchs (1968) to
ggeststhat theaddition of anynew technology generates an increase
‘ rther use by its very existence, and this in turn generates still more
hnology. . ,
ere are a number of interlocking socio—economic factors which
‘ p, ate-theadevelopment and use of medical technologies before their
- :opriateness' and efficiency are determined, even before the
ounds {for their increased use are established (McKinley, 1981).
care the dynamics of this «process in accounting for the massive
ansion of: medical machinery? Technology is central to claims of
essionalismx and this has two important related aspects: having
ruin the doctor-patient relationship and having power within the
ofession. Let‘us turn to the doctor—patient relationship first.
he professional hierarchyimeans that doctors are regarded as
, 'rts::whoz*possess technical knowledge and skill that lay people
"gthave. The doctor—patient relationship is also often a class one,
thgia meeting between a middle—class, highly educated professional
j‘d a:working—class patient. As well as being gendered, the rela-
‘nship is often characterized by racial inequalities. Technology plays
major role in consolidating this distancing of the doctor from a
j essarily passive patient, leading to the dehumanization of health
e. The growing supremacy of technology in contemporary medical

paternal genesi, actively swims upstream to fertilize the waiting egg
The profound gender-bias in the way medical science, View

 

   
 
 
  
  
 
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
  
  
   
  
 
 
   
  
  
  
   
 
 
  

 

‘Unlike the femalereproductive system, which is served by gynaecow
logy, there is no medical specialty for the male reproductive system
(Pfeffer, 1985, p. 35). Farfrom being a sign of neglect, this is symp
tomatrc of the medicalprofession’s refusal to see the male repro~
ductive system asdefective. , -
Much medical technology has no doubt been of physical «benefit at
women, particularly inxterms of pain relief, and this has been under
emphasrzedin the» feminist literature, which is highly critical-«o
modern, hospital—based obstetric practices.-This View equates th
increaseain technological, intervention with a corresponding loss a
women’s power and control; over. a dehumanized birth process. Th
history .of reproductivetechnology is thus :seen: in terms of th
oppressmnxof- womenby science and medicine. Modern practices are
compared unfavourably with explicit or implicit conceptions of wha
childbirth was like in earlier periods or in primitive societies. It is
presumed or asserted that until the advent of male medical control
childbirth was a safe, non-alienating and purely ‘natural’ physim -
logical process; that women midwives and relatives attended in a sym;
pathetic and supportive role.
. However, as Sally Macintyre (1977, p. 18) points out: ‘Childbirth
is, of course, socially controlled in all societies.’ Far from women
themselves being. individually in control, childbirth is invariably sur- ‘
rounded by rules, customs, prescriptions and sanctions. Indeed,

 

