16

17

 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
   
 
  
  
    
   
  
   
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
   
     
  
   
   

Reproductive Technology

conception from sex, it was actually first performed in 1776 (Me,
1984, p. 13).

See also Doyal (1979), especially chapter 7 on ‘Medicin
Imperialism’. ‘ ,
This point is well made in a parody of a new contraceptive techrh
for men reprinted in Spare Rib (Vol. 93, April 1980, p. 9) repro
below. ‘ ‘ ‘

SCROTAL INFECTION ‘Only 2 died’ ,
The newest development in male contraception was unveiled recentl
the American Women’s Surgical Symposium held at Ann Arbor M ‘

 

here in the land of household work there are small industrial plants
it sit- idle for the better part of every working day, there at:
have pieces of highly mechanized equipment which only get us:

rtwiee a month; there are consumption units which wee 1y
e out to their marketsto buy 8 ounces of this nonperishab e
not and 12 ounces of thaton ere are also workers who do not

, _ _, . . , . ks.
SCl‘l trons, tune clocks, or even paychec . ' ' .
JOb d8 9 Cowan, From Virginia Dare to Virginia Slims

preliminary findings of a study conducted on 763 unsuspecting
undergraduate students at a large midwest university. In her repo
Merkin stated that the new contraceptive - the IF!) — was a 3b
through in male contraception. It will be marketed under the trade4
‘Umbrelly’. ‘

   

scrotum but this is disregarded since it is known that the male has .
nerve endings in this area of his body. The underside of the umbrel-
contains a spermicidal jelly, hence the name ‘Umbrelly’.

troduction of technology into the home has especially affecteld
3s lives and the work that goes on in the householdalndee ,
been suggested that we should conceive of an industrttal rest/lo-
as‘ having occurred in the home too, that ‘the change rom he
dryitubito- the washing machine is no less profound than E166
e' from the hand loom to the power loom (Cowan, .19 ,
9). Women’s unpaid work in the home, servicing men, children
Others, has for along time been seen by feminists as thegcey to
en’s oppression. Relieving women of this burden hasbl cent:
V :project of feminism. As in other spheres, consrdera edoph
has attached to the possibility trim technology may provr e e
' nder ine uality in the ome. . .
incelth: ﬁgms housgwork has finally become the object of serrotus
{ emic study by historians, sociologists and even a few econonust 1::
5 Was part of a general concern with. the relationshlpbetwfeen -
'ging structures of industrial capitahsm and the shaping ob evliryn
life within the household. The Socrology of Housework y tu
icy published in 1974 marked an important break in ltrea ultrgl
sework as work within the framework of industrial socro ogy. k’
ante year, Joann Vanek’s article on ‘Trme Spent 1n Housitgorm
empared the findings of the US time use studies of housewor tom
the 1920s to the late 1960s. She argued that the aggregate tune Epic)l
n housework by full-time housewives had remained remar a y

sexual apparatus is said to be closest to man’s) proved the umbrell
be 100 per cent effective in preventing production of Sperm, .
eminently satisfactory'to the female whale since it does not interfere
her rutting pleasure. ‘

Dr Merkin declared the umbrelly to be statistically safe for the hum ’
male. She reported that of the 763 graduate students tested with
device only two died of scrotal infection, only 20 experienced swelli
of the tissues. Three developed cancer of the testicles, and 13 were td‘
depressed to have an erection. She stated that common complaints

 

 

Merkin was the incidence of massive scrotal infection necessitating the
surgical removal of the testicles. ‘But this is a rare case,’ said Merkin,
‘too rare to be statistically important.’ She and other distinguished mem-
bers of the Women’s College of Surgeons agreed that the benefits far
outweighed the risk to any individual man. (reprinted from East Bay
Morris Centre Newsletter and The Periodical Lunch, Ann Arbor;
Michigan.)

