24 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

study the social groups which actively seek to inﬂuence the form and
direction of technological design. What they overlook is the fact that
the absence of influence-from certain groups may also be significant.
For them, women’s absencefrom observable conflict does not indicate
that gender interests are being mobilized. For a social theory of
genders however, the almostcomplete exclusion of women from the
technological community points to the need to take account of the
underlying. structureof gender relations. Preferences for different
technologiesare shaped bye set. of social arrangements that reflect
men’s power in the; .wider- society. The process of «. technological
development is socially: structured and culturallypatterned by various
social interests that lie outside the immediate context of technological
innovation.

More than ever before technological change impinges on every
aspect of our public and private lives, from the artificially cultivated
food; thatrwe eatnto the increasingly sophisticated forms of com-
munication we use. Yet, in common with thelabour process debate,
the sociology, oftechnology has concentrated-almost exclusively on
the relations of paid production, focusingin particular on the early
stages of. product: development. Indoingso :they have ignored the
spheres of: reproductionsconsumption and theunpaid production that
takes. place in the :home.‘By contrast, feminist analysis points us
beyondthe factorysgates to see that technology is just as centrally
involved in these: spheres. ,

Inevitably perhaps, feminist work in this area has so far raised as
many questions as it has answered. Is technology valued because it
is associated withmasculinity or is masculinity valued because of the
association.with-technology? How do'we avoidtthe :tautology that
technology is masculine because. men do .it’? Why is women’s work
undervalued? Is there-such a thing as women’s, knowledge? Is it dif-
ferent from ‘feminine intuition’? Can technology :be reconstructed
around women’s interests? These are the questions that abstract
analysis has. so far «failedto answer. The character of salient interests
and, social, groups will differ depending on the particular empirical
sites of technology being considered. Thuswe need to look in more
concrete andhistoricaldetail at how, inspecific areas of work and
personal life, gender relations influence the technological enterprise.
This book focuses on gender, althoughit is often difficult to disen-
tangle the effects of gender from those of classand race. The chapters
that follow are organizedaround substantive areas of technology -
the technology of production, reproductive technologY. domestic
technology and the built environment.

  
   
    
    
 
    
   
   

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology 25

Throughout the book I will be stressing that a gendered applroach t:
‘ technology cannot be reduced to a vrew which. treats technoogy as
tof neutral artefacts manipulated by men in their own interest:i
do it is the case that men dominate the scientific and .techmc
titutions, it is perfectly plausible that there will. come a time when
menearei‘mme fully represented in these institutions Without trans-
rming the direction of technological development. To cue Justone
stance, w0men are increasingly being recruited .tnto‘the American
paw—defence programme but we do not hear their vorces protesting
bout its preoccupations. Nevertheless, gender relatronsare. an to ca
al constituent of the social organization of these institutions limb
-, their projects. It is impossible to divorce the gender. relattonslw 1c
are expressed in, and shape technologies from, the wrder socra strut:—
«titres-thatvcreate Land-maintain them. In developing a theory 0. it e
"gendered-character of technology, we are inevnably in danger of en «In
optingéaniessentialist permanent sees technology as inherent:l
patriarchal, or losing sight of the structure of gender relations throng f
Y veremphasis on the historical variability of the categonesho
omen’ andjg‘technology’. In what follows I Will try to chart anot er

cou'rse. ’

 

 

 

leIES

’1 For an introduction to this literature, see Barnes and Edge (1982) and
i ,. Knorr-Cetina and Mulkay (1983). . .
L 2 In order to map the field of gender and scrence, I have drawn heavrl:
on two excellent and comprehensive surveys by Harding (1986) an
‘ Schiebinger (1987).
3 ' This issue is discussed in Harding (1986). For a fuller account of the
‘ debate about whether Reason itself is male, see Lloyd (1984).
4 For an excellent discussion of Keller’s work, see Dugdale (1988). at t
5- For two useful socialist feminist critiques of universahst and essenu is
elements in some versions of radical feminist theory, see Eisenstein
1984 and Segal (1987). _ ‘ . . ~ ' ’
6 lior air account of the way the binary couple ‘empmcrsm—mducttvrsmh/
“intuitive-speculative theory building’ has beensglayed upon smce t c
seventeenth century, see Schuster and Yeo (19 . ‘ .
7 For a clever comparison of the biographies of McCltntock and Franklin
and their respective scientific methodologies, see Richards and Schuster
1989 . ‘ . _
8 (Staucienmaier (1985, pp. 103-20) outlines four characteristics of ”techno-
logical knowledge—scientific concepts, problematic data, engineering

theory, and technological skill.

