140 Technology as Masculine Culture Technology as Masculine Culture 141

  
    
   
  
  
  
  
  
   
   
    
  
  
   
  
  
    
 
   
    
  
    
 
   
    
   
 
  

She correctly points out that it may be an illusion to assume that
hnostrategic language literally articulates rather than hides the
trial reasons for the development and deployment of nuclear
capons. Rather than informing and shaping decisions, the discourse
ore often functions as a legitimation for political outcomes that have
curred for utterly different reasons. This language of patriarchal
phcmisms permeates many spheres of high technology.

the bomb can simply be explained in terms of the psycho-se f_
anxieties of its particular male inventors.
Sexual imagery has always been part of the world of warfare ,
both the military itself and arms manufacturers are constantly expl
ing the phallic imagery and promise of sexual domination that
weapons so conveniently suggest. This imagery however does
originate in particular individuals but in a broader cultural con,
Easlea’s analysis misses the social processes that give rise to this :2
of masculinity and validate such scientific and technological pro]
in thefirst place. As Ludi J ordanova (1987, p. 156) comments,::‘1
interesting questions are how and why creativity of all kinds has
defined in a gender-specific way, and what implications this has
power relations’. That the technological enterprise has developed
a distinctlymasculine realm may be largely a reflection of the
domination of all powerful public institutions, rather than someth;
specific to the male spirit.
The language used by defence intellectuals when discussing nucl '
strategy is particularly revealing. Carol Cohn (1987) discovered

Le Obsession with Control

‘ «fact, there are many parallels between the ethos of the scientific
Communityat Los Alamos and that of the computing fraternity. This
strongly reﬂected in Tracy Kidder’s (1982) account of a group of
en inventing a new computer in The Soul of a New Machine. Here
again we find the mixture-20f professional competitive rivalry and
mmplete dedication in the engineErs’ pursuit of the ‘perfect computer’
and: in doing so, winning the race. Again it is a world of men wOrking
compulsively into the small hours, enjoying being stretched to the
limits of their capacity, where there is no space for or compromise
with life outside of work. It was ‘the sexy job’ to be a builder of new
computers, and you had to be tough and fast; members of the group
often talked of doing things ‘quick and dirty’, and of ‘wars’, ‘shoot-
outs’, ‘hired guns’, and people who ‘shot from the hip’. Sexual meta—
phors abound such that the excitement of working on the latest
computer was'likened to ‘somebody told those guys that they would
have seventy—two hours with the girl of their dreams’. It is surely no
coincidence that the protagonists of the story are almost exclusively

 

with sexual and patriarchal imagery and sanitized abstraction,
language designed to talk exclusively about weapons and not ab ,,
human death. However, for her ‘the interesting issue is not so much
the imagery’s psychodynamic origins, as how it functions’ (Cohn
198:7 , p. 695).Sheargues that this ‘technostrategic’ discourse serves;
reduce anxiety about nuclear war by providing a series of culturali
grounded and culturally acceptable mechanisms that distance theseuser
from thinking of oneself as a victim, making it possible to think about
the unthinkable. '

g ‘ it is evident that men identify with technology and through their
‘ ‘dentification with technology men form bonds with one another.
. Women rarely appear in these stories, except as wives at home pro-
‘ viding the backdrop against which the men freely pursue their great
projects. This masculine workplace culture of passionate virtuosity is
typified by the hacker-style work so well described by Sherry Turkle
(1984) in a chapter entitled ‘Loving the Machine for Itself’. Based on ,
ethnographic research at MIT, Turkle describes the world of com-
puter hackers as the epitome of this male culture of ‘mastery,
individualism, nOnsensuality’. ‘Though hackers would deny that theirs
is atnacho culture, the preoccupation with winning and of subjecting
oneself to increasingly violent tests make their world peculiarly male
in spirit, peculiarly unfriendly to women.’ (1984, p.216). Being in an
intimate relationship with the computer is also a substitute for, and

Language that is abstract, sanitized, full of euphemisms; languagethat
is sexy and fun to use; paradigms whose referent is weapons; imagery

that domesticates and deflates the forces of mass destruction; imagery '
that reverses sentient and nonsentient matter, that conflates birth and:
death, destruction and creation ~ all Of these are part of what makes

it possible to be radically removed from the reality of what one is talk , ,
ing about and from the realities one is creating through discourse. ,
(Coho, 1987, p. 715)

