136 The Built Environment

10

11

12

13

  
 
 
  
  
    
    
       
   
  
   
     
    
  
   
  
      
  
 
 
  

the house; technology, in short, placed the woman in the midst of t
and not removed from them’. ,
For details of the Tudor Walters Report, see .1. Burma
pp.218~221). 7 y
This quotation is taken from an excellent article by G. All '
Crow (1990). For an account of the Women’s Housing Sub-Co
see B. McFarlane (1984) and A. Ravetz (1989).

ehnology as Masculine
' Hure

To all intents and purposes of course the television is now the foe

of most living rooms, but it has not displaced the hearth, often
installed adjacent to the fireplace. . , ,
See D. Harvey (1989) and E. Soja (1989). One of the few articles
does attempt to draw out the implications of these changes for i
is E. Harman (1983).

See A. Coleman (1985). For the classic critique, which is pa '
interesting for its discussion of the consequences for brin
children, see J. Jacobs (1962).

Indeed, some of these architectural principles have even gained
approval! See The Prince of Wales (1989).
In England too there was much enthusiasm for cooperative ho
keeping among the more socialist-inclined members of the Garden“
Movement. Ebenezer Howard organized extensive experiment
cooperative housekeeping, building quadrangles of kitchenless uni
the Garden Cities of Letchworth and Welwyn. According to Ra. ,
however, the demise of domestic service was an important factor. ‘It,
perhaps this strong male interest in getting the housework done 5
minimum inconvenience to themselves that, more than any fem
inspiration, explains the interest of certain men or the garden city may
ment in collective housekeeping.’ (Ravetz, 1989, p. 192).

The source of information for this paragraph is M. Renner (1988) and
the New Internationalist No. 195, May 1989, issue on ‘Car Chaos
The elimination of the interurban rail systems is documented in de
by'B. Snell, ‘Report on American Ground Transport’, Subcommittee
Antitrust and Monopoly, Senate Judiciary Committee, 26 Februa
1974. .
The study of women and transportation is quite new and some interesting
themes are emerging. See M. Cichocki (1980) and S. Fava (1980 ,,
L. Pickup (1988); Women and Transport Forum (1988) and V. Scharff
(1988).

This summary of R. Palm and A. Pred (1978) is taken from A. Giddens ’
(I984, pp. 11445). In the original article, the authors make the impor«

tant point that the daily prisms of women in various stages of the life-
cycle and in various social classes are different.

nk between technology and masculinity. is commonly supposed
- self-evident and in no need of explanation. But as this chapter
show, the relationship, although strong, is more complex than
' ear.

hit/cf 1:32:35 argued that theatraditional conception of technology
eavily weighted against women. We tend to think about techno (igy
terms of industrial machinery and cars, for example, ignoringlott' er
hnologies that affect most aspects of everyday life. The very :1 mi-
of technology, in other words, has a male bias. This emphasgs
echnologies dominated by men consptres in turn to dimmis kt e
ificance of women’s technologies, such as horticulture, coo mg
childcare, and so reproduces the stereotype of women as‘Zlechnov
gically ignorant and incapable. The enduring force of the ruin a
tion between technology and manhness, therefore, is not-taii e,
biological sex difference. It is rather the result of the luster;

5 construction of gender. .
ughisalchapter will examine the ideological and cultural pr
serve to make ‘natural’, and thereby help to generate
onnection between men and machines. That our press

   
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 

 

,meanings and values to technology. To emphasis .
ways in which the symbolic representation ofggtechn

it isthe ideology of masculinity that has

technology. .

In order to understand the underlying tie
and technology, 1 will now consrderseve
this identification, and where technology , _, ,

     

