 
  
   
  
    
 

166 Conclusion Conclusion 367
participation have been marginalized; a more democrati
egalitarian society would be reﬂected in their increased involv
in decision—making about technology at the workplace, at home
in the community.

- Since World War II, as much as 40 per cent of research and development
Designing alternative feminist technologies is, however, far

effort worldwide is devoted to the military. A recent calculation estimates
hat 37 per cent of the British engineering industry 15 reliant on military
markets. See David Dickson (1984) for a description-of theever-closer
relationship between science institutions and military-industrial interests

in the USA.

  
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
   
    
     
   
 
 
 
   
  

embryonic. Feminine values are themselves distorted by the;

dominated structure of society. Rejecting essentialist notion,
values as inherently masculine or feminine opens up debate abOu
form that values, such as caring and nurturing, should take;:

putting men’s and children’s needs first, that have relations of sub
dination built into them. Rather than calling for a technology has
on feminine values, we need to go beyond masculinity and femini
to construct technology according to a completely different se
socially desirable values.

Feminist debates about political strategy concerning technolo
posit forms of action that break with conventional politics. They»
about making interventions in every sphere of life. This means co
testing the direction and use of technology around a whole rang
particular locations — from the workplace to the health clinic, t
school canteen to the supermarket, from the design of housingan,
vacuum cleaners to the design of sewerage systems. Small victories ,-
make an enormous difference to people’s experience and are poli
cally achievable ~ such as changing the design of buses so that women
with prams can travel more easily. :

The time is ripe for reworking the relationship between technology
and gender. The old masculinist ideology has been made increasingly
untenable by the dramatic changes in technology, by the challenge of
feminism and by the new awareness of the vulnerability of the natural
world. I have argued that technologies reveal the societies that invent
and use them, their notions of social status and distributive justice
In so far as technology currently reﬂects a man’s world, the struggle
to transform it demands a transformation of gender relations.

