  
   
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
    
  
   
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
      

HA The Built Environment The Built Environment ”5

movement, the germ theory of disease and the idea of ‘scient-i
motherhood’. Standards of personal and household hygiene r
didr'preoccupations with motherhood and children. The ma

‘1) Britain was to play a key role in ensuring that the single—family
hold became the dominant form of housing. Concerns about
mprovemcnt for the working-class and' fears about social
were: the twin motives of state reforms. As Gittins has argued:
the-zIState was actually ,rdefining what family structure and home
‘ouldgbe; the size of council houses, for instance, betrayed what
ernment felt to be the normative, the “right”, size of family’.
ms, 1982', p.48)

‘zdebate about what sort of housing should be provided for the
nlgaclassin/the inter-war period was one in which women them~
articipated-Set up in 1918, the Tudor Walters Committee,
stingagexclusively ofer politicians, architectsand technical
Viiwas influenced by the architects associated with the Garden
h‘liovetnent.2 They recommended low»density terrace housing
Wider ,frontages to provide re air and light, and ideally the
com“ was to he a ‘throug oom from the front, to the back
e ouse. Thiséroom would maximize “sun and ventilation in the
izandéemphasize family togetherness. The simplest and cheapest
53}: model had a living-room with a range where most cooking
“(1 be-done and a scullery with a gas cooker for occasional use,
copper. andbath. ‘ '
tilting-class women interviewed‘at the time by members of the
men’s Housing Sub-Committee insisted that a separate parlour be
ded whereéthey- couldﬁrelaxandiescape from work unfinished in
st; of thevhouse. Itahas been said that: e‘workingaclass women
'elyadefended their right {to a room which expressed their pride in
sewifery and which also afforded additional privacy, a scarce
medity in working class households’ (Lewis, 1984, p. 29).3 How-
‘ iven that maintaining the neat appearance of the parlour added
.omen?s work, .it is not “entirely clear why working-class women
,eportedizto have ,beentsu’ch fierce advocates of its inclusion in their
ses. The presence or absence of 'a parlour in workingclass housing
, - e quite a political issue in the inter-war period. Inﬂuential archi-
tsisuch asRaymond Unwin saw it asimpractical to split the house
ovations small rooms and attacked the respectable working-class
ire: for a:front=parlour:that was rarely used as ‘a desire to imitate
middle-class house’. Where the architects’ views prevailed, there
arious stories of occupants dividing up the space themselves with
itions to create 1a separate parlour, thus demonstrating that
king-class people resisted architects views of proper home life.

therefore a solution to the ‘servant problem’, supposedly enab

design of the rhouse'itself . Houses were being built for single,:fa
cecupationvwithout maid’s rooms. Greatemphasis was placedon
interior plan of thehouse inéorder to design efficientspacesztom
mize the» housekeeper’s work. The idea ethatrhousework :could
rationalized accordingito the principles of scientific management
architects to devote much time inthe l920sandr1930s to studying
logical sequence of work processes in the: kitchen. Metaphors w
describedtthe? kitchen sas‘a laboratory prevailed; :These ideas of
tional, labour-saving homes became: associated “with thetzmod
movement‘sin» architecture. ' Le» Corbusieﬁs famous phrase - itheyz
iszza machine forriiliving’rcaptured this new view. While iespon
emancipatory,rindeedésocialist-inspired politics, it seems the mod
istséézdid not appreciate, that machines need constant servicing. ,,
For wbmen, the machine was to become a treadmillLThe kitch
now designed for the servantless family, was acornpact fitted kits
with room for one worker, the housewife. Neither its small size it
its location, sealed off from the rest of the house, were conduciv
the sharing of kitchen duties. As with kitchens, internal bathroom
became standard in many householdsduring thisperiod because
the mass production of cast iron enamelware, as well as the obsessio
with dirt and disease. Thismodel was to; become the prototype,

iglorkingeclass as well asrniddle—class homes after the Second Wo
ar. _

   

 

Public Housing for Private Lives

So far I have been concentrating on the development of a domesti
ideal ,bas‘ed‘on the family and on private life and its arehitectur’
embodiment in the single—family house. In the period betweenrt-h
wars most working-class families still lived, ate, cooked, and spent cal
their-time in one main room, with shared facilities. Large-scale state
intervention in the housing market in the aftermath of both world

