4 Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology

The point was that the distinction between science and ideology could
not be sustained because the dominant social relations of society at
large are constitutive of science.

During this same period a radical shift took place in the history,
philosophy and sociology of science, which added weight to the view
that science could no longer be understood simply as the discovery of
reality. Thomas Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1970)
marked the beginning of what was to become a major new field of
study known as the sociology of scientific knowledge.’ Its central
premise is that scientific knowledge, like all other forms of know-
ledge, is affected at the most profound level by the society in which
it is conducted.

Much research has examined the circumstances in which scientists
actually produce scientific knowledge and has demonstrated how
social interests shape this knowledge. Studies provide many instances
of scientific theories drawing models and images from the wider
society. It has also been demonstrated that social and political con-
siderations enter into scientists’ evaluations of the truth or falsity of
different theories. Even what is considered as ‘fact’, established by
experiment and observation, is social. Different groups of scientists
in different circumstances have produced radically different ‘facts’.
Numerous historical and contemporary studies of science, and the
social processes through which inquiry proceeds, highlight the social
aspects of scientific knowledge.

Despite the advances that were made through the critique of science
in the 19703, gender-conscious accounts were rare. The social studies
of natural science systematically avoided examining the relationship
between gender and science in either its historical or sociological
dimensions. Similarly, the radical science movement focused almost
exclusively on the capitalist nature of science ignoring the relationship
of science to patriarchy. In short, gender did not figure as an analy-
tical tool in either of these accounts of science.

It is only during the last decade with writers such as Carolyn
Merchant (1980), Elizabeth Fee (1981), Evelyn Fox Keller (1985),
Brian Easlea (1981), Nancy Hartsock (1983), Hilary Rose (1983) and
Ludmilla Jordanova (1980) that Western science has been labelled as
inherently patriarchal.2 As Sandra Harding (1986) expresses it,
feminist criticisms of science had evolved from asking the ‘woman
question’ in science to asking the more radical ‘science question’ in
feminism. Rather than asking how women can be more equitably
treated within and by science, they ask ‘how a science apparently so
deeply involved in distinctively masculine projects can possibly be

 

Feminist Critiques of Science and Technology 5

used for emancipatory ends’ (p. 29). It is therefore time to consider

the main feminist critiques of science itself.

Scientific Knowledge as Patriarchal Knowledge

The concern with a gender analysis of scientific knowledge can be
traced back to the women’s health movement that developed in Britain

and America during the 19705. Regaining knowledge and control over

women’s bodies — their sexuality and fertility — was seen as crucial to
women’s liberation. Campaigns for improved birth control and abor-
tion rights were central to the early period of secondwave feminism.
There was a growing disenchantment with male medical theories and
practices. The growth and consolidation of male expertise at the
expense of both women’s health and women’s healing skills was the
theme of an American study,"i"SWitches, Midwives and Nurses: A
History of Women Healers (Ehrenreich and English, 1976). This
documented how the growth and professionalization of male—
dominated medicine had led to the marginalization of female health
workers. At the same time, critiques of psychiatry and the treatment
of women’s depression as pathological were being expounded. Asking
why the incidence of mental illness should be higher among women
than men, feminists exposed the sexist bias in medical definitions of
mental health and illness. Implicit in these analyses was a conviction
that women could develOp new kinds of knowledge and skills, drawing
on their own experience and needs. The insights of the radical science
movement contributed to the view of medical science as a repository
of patriarchal values.

If medical scientific knowledge is patriarchal, then what about the
rest of science? As Maureen McNeil (1987) points out, it was a short
step to the emergence of a new feminist politics about scientific know-
ledge in general. Some feminists re-examined the Scientific Revolu—
tion of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, arguing that the
science which emerged was fundamentally based on the masculine
projects of reason and objectivity. They characterized the conceptual
dichotomizing central to scientific thought and to Western philosophy
in general, as distinctly masculine. Culture vs. nature, mind vs. body,
reason vs. emotion, objectivity vs. subjectivity, the public realm vs.
the private realm ~ in each dichotomy the former must dominate
the latter and the latter in each case seems to be systematically
associated with the feminine. The general issue of whether conceptual
dichotomizing is itself distinctly masculine or part of the Western

