    
   
 
   
  
 
   
   
   
  
    
   
  
   
  
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
   
  
 
 
   
  
  
   
   
 
   
   
   
   
  

H8 The Built Environment The Built Environment 119

danger of the city. DeveIOpers encouraged the massive post-war
$031136 suburbs, as low-density development meant more profit
_e;:ébuilding industry as well as providing a mass market for
tuner durables. Although women have paid a heavy price for
ban development, they shared men’s dreams of home owner-
eir disillusion with the city and hopes for a better life in the
healt- took several decades forthe aridness and uniformity of
i gasuburban life, and especially the isolation and boredom it
entire-housewife, to become immortalized in Betty Friedan’s
:ofss‘the problem with no name’.
‘sonant with this idea of the home as private space, the dis—
enessofr- the home became enshrined in state zoning policies,
erezatvthe heart of post-war town planning. Cities and towns
orbezigeographically segregated into their various activities, each
«cs-appropriate location and setting. Zoning ‘. . . closely approxi-
:stereotypical ideasﬁabout man’s use of the environment’
ix,:12984, p. 38). It was ass-timed that the home and the neigh-
od-were the setting for most women’s lives and that men would
0 work located elsewhere. The main function of transport
bettogget men fromhomc to work and back again.
,impactrthat, this would have on women’s mobility was not
tiered“. As-Susan Saegert? (15980) has observed, the long-standing
olicsdichotomy between ‘rnasculine cities and feminine suburbs’
‘ entailysshaped theeiactualorganization of the urban envi-
entgatyingaswomen :rnorerclo'sely to their immediate locality.
,ential areas were: and still are physically separated from
trial/ commercial sites, distancing women from the ‘eConomy'.
ng thus intensified the privatized nature of many women’s lives
heir exclusionfrom the public, socially organized productive life.
than zoning restrictions have also operated to separate different
rtsof housing development, limiting moderately priced high-density
dings toinner-city sites. Assuch it has: been an important tool in
andvsracc segregation — most infamously in South African urban
nning, whereblack people are expressly confined to certain parts
the city. »
' ce at least the mid-19705 employers have responded {to the»
aration- of the, workplace and home by relocating certain kinds
Vities tothesuburbs in. order to capture the potential labour
tiedwomenswho reside there. This has required the new rig
esuburban space, especially in middle-class suburbs becau
te middlesclass wives that are wanted forroffice work; Urban 5
once more being restructured as the demand furclericai

of family. The dominant modern housing design does not lend
to satisfying thehousing needs of the majority of households
which are in fact no longer composed of nuclear families.

Symbolic values about domestic life are perhaps even :mor
expressed in the externalappearance of houses. The‘exterioréo
is the prime indicator of people’s social status and extremal
tant to their'self-image. Houses are, after all,:the major art:
consumption and: their exterior iswhat‘rcounts most when,‘
purchased. Architects’ prime concern has always been with :th 5
facerof buildings and the current debate on the-nature of post
architecture is reproducing this concern. The “contrastvvbe
domestic and commercial architecture is interesting in this
While non—residential architecture has gone through massive
formationsin‘style, building materials, and construction techno
the preference for Georgianand Victorian domestic archi H
remains. The facades of old. houSes are-retained while the i
gutted and modernized. There is even a: market for newﬁhous
are replicas of these styles, or in America of colonial-style it

While state—oﬁthe-art commercial buildings pride’themsel
being energy efficient and‘vmaintenanceafree, the housewsti
traditionalmaterials such aswood and bricks that are bothexp
and laborious to maintain. The assumption that women .willaco
to do much of this domestic swork for free no doubt explal
disregard: for efficiency in domestic architecture; Howev’e
explanation is clearly more complex: mentoo are involved-in
tamingxtheeexterior of the home, investing much of theirspar
and: money in 2 do—it—yourselt‘ _ home improvements. Furthermo i
preference for traditional architecture reﬂects an attachm
traditional values and a desire that the home should be as:
resemblingthe workplace as little as possible. High—rise tower

met with little :objectionas offices but have proved very unpo
as homes. ‘ I

 

 

 

$emi~Defached in the Suburbs

  
 
 
 
 
 

 

_For all that privacy within the house has diminished, the expectati
IS that families as a whole remain private from each other. (Ma
1984, p. 55) The VictOrianzideal of the detached or semi-deter
house in a suburban or semi-rural setting remains essent
unchanged. Theme—family house with a garden was regarded h
middle class and working class alike as the best place Ito'k'bri”

children, offering a healthy enVironment away from the dirt, 'n

 

