  
    
 
    
 
  
 
  
  
 
     
    
  
   
  
  
  
 
      
   
    
  
     
    

124 The Built Environment The Built Environment l25

countries, their professional education and training means that the
work of women architects rs not qualitatively different from the
male architects That women architects have traditionally b ‘
assumed to be best suited for the design of domestic architectur
Intenors reﬂects their low status in the profession rather th
spémfiCally female attribute It 1s to do with the hierarchical rel
ship? between what is considered to be great ‘architecture’ of the -
rcalm as opposed to the mere ‘building’ of houses.
On closer inspection several of Kennedy’s characteristics of :
designers features of architecture operating within the constrai
by commercial imperatives. Women architects working uncle
same market pressures tend to design like men. To see centr
office towers solely as the product of masculinist, phallocentric d
values is to present a very partial picture which ignores inve
calculations, capital flows, global property markets and the ‘

eonomic exploitation of women’s labour by men as the most basic
’ so of women’s inequality. The central object of their campaigning
as to socialize household labour and childcare Most significantly,
sought to do this by a complete transformation of the spatial
rm: and material culture of American homes, neighbourhoods and
es Recognizing that the exploitation of women’s labour by men
. embodied m the actual design of houses, these ‘material feminists’

ghbourhoods was the only way to free women from domestic
'dgery. They therefore urged architects and urban planners to
lore radically new types of residential building 9

we of the more influential women were Melusina Fay Pierce and
arlotte Perkins Gilman. In 1868 Melusina Fay Pierce, a middle—
Massachusetts woman, outlined plans for cooperative residential
ghbourhoods made up of kitchenless houses and a cooperative
usekeeping centre She suggested that women organize to perform
it household tasks cooperatively, building communal kitchens,
indries, dining facilities and childcare centres as necessary. Freed
cm the domestic routine, they would then be able to develop other
ests outside the home. Writing m 1898, the economist Charlotte
skins Gilman recommended kitchenless houses of a similar sort,
gesting that they be linked inurban rows or connected by covered
kways in a suburban block. Like Pierce, Gilman favoured the
nstruction of kitchenless apartments with collective dining facilities
women with families. For Gilman however, the socialization of
mastic work, rather than cooperation in its execution, was the
, cans to economic independence for women. She envisaged a com-
letely professionalized system of housekeeping which would free
"omen from the ties of cooking, cleaning and childcare.

Ultimately this domestic reform movement foundered on the drf f1-
lty of overcoming both sex and class divisions in their urban and

explained as much by economic processes which lead to
accumulated capital being invested 111 the central business distri
Margo Huxley (1988, p. 41) points out, these investments depc,
‘political actions to retain the primacy of the central city and o
percepnons of (male) corporate directors of the prestige and
that 1 reﬂeCted in taking occupancy of the latest h1gh-rrse, high
office; tower’ ‘

lulean account in terms of capitalist investment demonstrates

 

   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
   
 
  

oping societies accepted hierarchical organizational structures
hich put educated, middle-class managers at the top and paid
hwashers and laundry workers rather poorly ‘Feminists with
capital who could afford the new physical environment for collective
mestic work never thought of voluntarily sharing that domestic
rk themselves’ (Hayden, 1982, p 201). Thus, the liberation of
professional middle—class feminists from domestic drudgery involved
exploiting women of a lower economic class. The failure of this
experiment in architectural solutions to the problem of women’s

Women s experience is very d1verse, especially 1n terms of class
is one or the interesting issues that is raised 1n Delores Hayden’ s (l
extensive research on nineteenth-century American feminist plan
for utopian communities Alternative approaches to individualize
housework in single-family homes were proposed by an earli
women’s movement. This ‘lost feminist tradition’ identified the

 

